Copyright

Nella Larsen’s Passing was first published in the United States in 1929
by Alfred A. Knopf. On January 1, 2025, the book entered the public
domain, allowing it to be freely reproduced and disseminated. This
version is based on a digital version of the first edition available on
the HathiTrust.

The cover image is from Archibol Motley’s The Octoroon Girl, 1925 (oil
on canvas).

Dedication

For
Carl Van Vechten
and
Fania Marinoff

Epigraph

One three centuries removed
From the scenes his fathers loved,
Spicy grove, cinnamon tree,
What is Africa to me?

—COUNTEE CULLEN

Part One: Encounter

One

It was the last letter in Irene Redfield’s little pile of morning mail.
After her other ordinary and clearly directed letters the long envelope
of thin Italian paper with its almost illegible scrawl seemed out of
place and alien. And there was, too, something mysterious and slightly
furtive about it. A thin sly thing which bore no return address to
betray the sender. Not that she hadn’t immediately known who its sender
was. Some two years ago she had one very like it in outward appearance.
Furtive, but yet in some peculiar, determined way a little flaunting.
Purple ink. Foreign paper of extraordinary size.

It had been, Irene noted, postmarked in New York the day before. Her
brows came together in a tiny frown. The frown, however, was more from
perplexity than from annoyance; though there was in her thoughts an
element of both. She was wholly unable to comprehend such an attitude
towards danger as she was sure the letter’s contents would reveal; and
she disliked the idea of opening and reading it.

This, she reflected, was of a piece with all that she knew of Clare
Kendry. Stepping always on the edge of danger. Always aware, but not
drawing back or turning aside. Certainly not because of any alarms or
feeling of outrage on the part of others.

And for a swift moment Irene Redfield seemed to see a pale small girl
sitting on a ragged blue sofa, sewing pieces of bright red cloth
together, while her drunken father, a tall, powerfully built man, raged
threateningly up and down the shabby room, bellowing curses and making
spasmodic lunges at her which were not the less frightening because they
were, for the most part, ineffectual. Sometimes he did manage to reach
her. But only the fact that the child had edged herself and her poor
sewing over to the farthermost corner of the sofa suggested that she was
in any way perturbed by this menace to herself and her work.

Clare had known well enough that it was unsafe to take a portion of the
dollar that was her weekly wage for the doing of many errands for the
dressmaker who lived on the top floor of the building of which Bob
Kendry was janitor. But that knowledge had not deterred her. She wanted
to go to her Sunday school’s picnic, and she had made up her mind to
wear a new dress. So, in spite of certain unpleasantness and possible
danger, she had taken the money to buy the material for that pathetic
little red frock.

There had been, even in those days, nothing sacrificial in Clare
Kendry’s idea of life, no allegiance beyond her own immediate desire.
She was selfish, and cold, and hard. And yet she had, too, a strange
capacity of transforming warmth and passion, verging sometimes almost on
theatrical heroics.

Irene, who was a year or more older than Clare, remembered the day that
Bob Kendry had been brought home dead, killed in a silly saloon-fight.
Clare, who was at that time a scant fifteen years old, had just stood
there with her lips pressed together, her thin arms folded across her
narrow chest, staring down at the familiar pasty-white face of her
parent with a sort of disdain in her slanting black eyes. For a very
long time she had stood like that, silent and staring. Then, quite
suddenly, she had given way to a torrent of weeping, swaying her thin
body, tearing at her bright hair, and stamping her small feet. The
outburst had ceased as suddenly as it had begun. She glanced quickly
about the bare room, taking everyone in, even the two policemen, in a
sharp look of flashing scorn. And, in the next instant, she had turned
and vanished through the door.

Seen across the long stretch of years, the thing had more the appearance
of an outpouring of pent-up fury than of an overflow of grief for her
dead father; though she had been, Irene admitted, fond enough of him in
her own rather catlike way.

Catlike. Certainly that was the word which best described Clare Kendry,
if any single word could describe her. Sometimes she was hard and
apparently without feeling at all; sometimes she was affectionate and
rashly impulsive. And there was about her an amazing soft malice, hidden
well away until provoked. Then she was capable of scratching, and very
effectively too. Or, driven to anger, she would fight with a ferocity
and impetuousness that disregarded or forgot any danger; superior
strength, numbers, or other unfavorable circumstances. How savagely she
had clawed those boys the day they had hooted her parent and sung a
derisive rhyme, of their own composing, which pointed out certain
eccentricities in his careening gait! And how deliberately she had——

Irene brought her thoughts back to the present, to the letter from Clare
Kendry that she still held unopened in her hand. With a little feeling
of apprehension, she very slowly cut the envelope, drew out the folded
sheets, spread them, and began to read.

It was, she saw at once, what she had expected since learning from the
postmark that Clare was in the city. An extravagantly phrased wish to
see her again. Well, she needn’t and wouldn’t, Irene told herself,
accede to that. Nor would she assist Clare to realize her foolish desire
to return for a moment to that life which long ago, and of her own
choice, she had left behind her.

She ran through the letter, puzzling out, as best she could, the
carelessly formed words or making instinctive guesses at them.

“For I am lonely, so lonelycannot help longing to be with you again, as
I have never longed for anything before; and I have wanted many things
in my life.You can’t know how in this pale life of mine I am all the
time seeing the bright pictures of that other that I once thought I was
glad to be free of.It’s like an ache, a pain that never ceases.” Sheets
upon thin sheets of it. And ending finally with, “and it’s your fault,
’Rene dear. At least partly. For I wouldn’t now, perhaps, have this
terrible, this wild desire if I hadn’t seen you that time in Chicago.”

Brilliant red patches flamed in Irene Redfield’s warm olive cheeks.

“That time in Chicago.” The words stood out from among the many
paragraphs of other words, bringing with them a clear, sharp
remembrance, in which even now, after two years, humiliation,
resentment, and rage were mingled.

Two

This is what Irene Redfield remembered.

Chicago. August. A brilliant day, hot, with a brutal staring sun pouring
down rays that were like molten rain. A day on which the very outlines
of the buildings shuddered as if in protest at the heat. Quivering lines
sprang up from baked pavements and wriggled along the shining
car-tracks. The automobiles parked at the kerbs were a dancing blaze,
and the glass of the shop-windows threw out a blinding radiance. Sharp
particles of dust rose from the burning sidewalks, stinging the seared
or dripping skins of wilting pedestrians. What small breeze there was
seemed like the breath of a flame fanned by slow bellows.

It was on that day of all others that Irene set out to shop for the
things which she had promised to take home from Chicago to her two small
sons, Brian junior and Theodore. Characteristically, she had put it off
until only a few crowded days remained of her long visit. And only this
sweltering one was free of engagements till the evening.

Without too much trouble she had got the mechanical aeroplane for
Junior. But the drawing-book, for which Ted had so gravely and
insistently given her precise directions, had sent her in and out of
five shops without success.

It was while she was on her way to a sixth place that right before her
smarting eyes a man toppled over and became an inert crumpled heap on
the scorching cement. About the lifeless figure a little crowd gathered.
Was the man dead, or only faint? someone asked her. But Irene didn’t
know and didn’t try to discover. She edged her way out of the increasing
crowd, feeling disagreeably damp and sticky and soiled from contact with
so many sweating bodies.

For a moment she stood fanning herself and dabbing at her moist face
with an inadequate scrap of handkerchief. Suddenly she was aware that
the whole street had a wobbly look, and realized that she was about to
faint. With a quick perception of the need for immediate safety, she
lifted a wavering hand in the direction of a cab parked directly in
front of her. The perspiring driver jumped out and guided her to his
car. He helped, almost lifted her in. She sank down on the hot leather
seat.

For a minute her thoughts were nebulous. They cleared.

“I guess,” she told her Samaritan, “it’s tea I need. On a roof
somewhere.”

“The Drayton, ma’am?” he suggested. “They do say as how it’s always a
breeze up there.”

“Thank you. I think the Drayton’ll do nicely,” she told him.

There was that little grating sound of the clutch being slipped in as
the man put the car in gear and slid deftly out into the boiling
traffic. Reviving under the warm breeze stirred up by the moving cab,
Irene made some small attempts to repair the damage that the heat and
crowds had done to her appearance.

All too soon the rattling vehicle shot towards the sidewalk and stood
still. The driver sprang out and opened the door before the hotel’s
decorated attendant could reach it. She got out, and thanking him
smilingly as well as in a more substantial manner for his kind
helpfulness and understanding, went in through the Drayton’s wide doors.

Stepping out of the elevator that had brought her to the roof, she was
led to a table just in front of a long window whose gently moving
curtains suggested a cool breeze. It was, she thought, like being wafted
upward on a magic carpet to another world, pleasant, quiet, and
strangely remote from the sizzling one that she had left below.

The tea, when it came, was all that she had desired and expected. In
fact, so much was it what she had desired and expected that after the
first deep cooling drink she was able to forget it, only now and then
sipping, a little absently, from the tall green glass, while she
surveyed the room about her or looked out over some lower buildings at
the bright unstirred blue of the lake reaching away to an undetected
horizon.

She had been gazing down for some time at the specks of cars and people
creeping about in streets, and thinking how silly they looked, when on
taking up her glass she was surprised to find it empty at last. She
asked for more tea and while she waited, began to recall the happenings
of the day and to wonder what she was to do about Ted and his book. Why
was it that almost invariably he wanted something that was difficult or
impossible to get? Like his father. For ever wanting something that he
couldn’t have.

Presently there were voices, a man’s booming one and a woman’s slightly
husky. A waiter passed her, followed by a sweetly scented woman in a
fluttering dress of green chiffon whose mingled pattern of narcissuses,
jonquils, and hyacinths was a reminder of pleasantly chill spring days.
Behind her there was a man, very red in the face, who was mopping his
neck and forehead with a big crumpled handkerchief.

“Oh dear!” Irene groaned, rasped by annoyance, for after a little
discussion and commotion they had stopped at the very next table. She
had been alone there at the window and it had been so satisfyingly
quiet. Now, of course, they would chatter.

But no. Only the woman sat down. The man remained standing, abstractedly
pinching the knot of his bright blue tie. Across the small space that
separated the two tables his voice carried clearly.

“See you later, then,” he declared, looking down at the woman. There was
pleasure in his tones and a smile on his face.

His companion’s lips parted in some answer, but her words were blurred
by the little intervening distance and the medley of noises floating up
from the streets below. They didn’t reach Irene. But she noted the
peculiar caressing smile that accompanied them.

The man said: “Well, I suppose I’d better,” and smiled again, and said
good-bye, and left.

An attractive-looking woman, was Irene’s opinion, with those dark,
almost black, eyes and that wide mouth like a scarlet flower against the
ivory of her skin. Nice clothes too, just right for the weather, thin
and cool without being mussy, as summer things were so apt to be.

A waiter was taking her order. Irene saw her smile up at him as she
murmured something—thanks, maybe. It was an odd sort of smile. Irene
couldn’t quite define it, but she was sure that she would have classed
it, coming from another woman, as being just a shade too provocative for
a waiter. About this one, however, there was something that made her
hesitate to name it that. A certain impression of assurance, perhaps.

The waiter came back with the order. Irene watched her spread out her
napkin, saw the silver spoon in the white hand slit the dull gold of the
melon. Then, conscious that she had been staring, she looked quickly
away.

Her mind returned to her own affairs. She had settled, definitely, the
problem of the proper one of two frocks for the bridge party that night,
in rooms whose atmosphere would be so thick and hot that every breath
would be like breathing soup. The dress decided, her thoughts had gone
back to the snag of Ted’s book, her unseeing eyes far away on the lake,
when by some sixth sense she was acutely aware that someone was watching
her.

Very slowly she looked around, and into the dark eyes of the woman in
the green frock at the next table. But she evidently failed to realize
that such intense interest as she was showing might be embarrassing, and
continued to stare. Her demeanour was that of one who with utmost
singleness of mind and purpose was determined to impress firmly and
accurately each detail of Irene’s features upon her memory for all time,
nor showed the slightest trace of disconcertment at having been detected
in her steady scrutiny.

Instead, it was Irene who was put out. Feeling her colour heighten under
the continued inspection, she slid her eyes down. What, she wondered,
could be the reason for such persistent attention? Had she, in her haste
in the taxi, put her hat on backwards? Guardedly she felt at it.
No. Perhaps there was a streak of powder somewhere on her face. She made
a quick pass over it with her handkerchief. Something wrong with her
dress? She shot a glance over it. Perfectly all right. What was it?

Again she looked up, and for a moment her brown eyes politely returned
the stare of the other’s black ones, which never for an instant fell or
wavered. Irene made a little mental shrug. Oh well, let her look! She
tried to treat the woman and her watching with indifference, but she
couldn’t. All her efforts to ignore her, it, were futile. She stole
another glance. Still looking. What strange languorous eyes she had!

And gradually there rose in Irene a small inner disturbance, odious and
hatefully familiar. She laughed softly, but her eyes flashed.

Did that woman, could that woman, somehow know that here before her very
eyes on the roof of the Drayton sat a Negro?

Absurd! Impossible! White people were so stupid about such things for
all that they usually asserted that they were able to tell; and by the
most ridiculous means, finger-nails, palms of hands, shapes of ears,
teeth, and other equally silly rot. They always took her for an Italian,
a Spaniard, a Mexican, or a gipsy. Never, when she was alone, had they
even remotely seemed to suspect that she was a Negro. No, the woman
sitting there staring at her couldn’t possibly know.

Nevertheless, Irene felt, in turn, anger, scorn, and fear slide over
her. It wasn’t that she was ashamed of being a Negro, or even of having
it declared. It was the idea of being ejected from any place, even in
the polite and tactful way in which the Drayton would probably do it,
that disturbed her.

But she looked, boldly this time, back into the eyes still frankly
intent upon her. They did not seem to her hostile or resentful. Rather,
Irene had the feeling that they were ready to smile if she would.
Nonsense, of course. The feeling passed, and she turned away with the
firm intention of keeping her gaze on the lake, the roofs of the
buildings across the way, the sky, anywhere but on that annoying woman.
Almost immediately, however, her eyes were back again. In the midst of
her fog of uneasiness she had been seized by a desire to outstare the
rude observer. Suppose the woman did know or suspect her race. She
couldn’t prove it.

Suddenly her small fright increased. Her neighbour had risen and was
coming towards her. What was going to happen now?

“Pardon me,” the woman said pleasantly, “but I think I know you.” Her
slightly husky voice held a dubious note.

Looking up at her, Irene’s suspicions and fears vanished. There was no
mistaking the friendliness of that smile or resisting its charm.
Instantly she surrendered to it and smiled too, as she said: “I’m afraid
you’re mistaken.”

“Why, of course, I know you!” the other exclaimed. “Don’t tell me you’re
not Irene Westover. Or do they still call you ’Rene?”

In the brief second before her answer, Irene tried vainly to recall
where and when this woman could have known her. There, in Chicago. And
before her marriage. That much was plain. High school? College? Y.W.C.A.
committees? High school, most likely. What white girls had she known
well enough to have been familiarly addressed as ’Rene by them? The
woman before her didn’t fit her memory of any of them. Who was she?

“Yes, I’m Irene Westover. And though nobody calls me ’Rene any more,
it’s good to hear the name again. And you—” She hesitated, ashamed that
she could not remember, and hoping that the sentence would be finished
for her.

“Don’t you know me? Not really, ’Rene?”

“I’m sorry, but just at the minute I can’t seem to place you.”

Irene studied the lovely creature standing beside her for some clue to
her identity. Who could she be? Where and when had they met? And through
her perplexity there came the thought that the trick which her memory
had played her was for some reason more gratifying than disappointing to
her old acquaintance, that she didn’t mind not being recognized.

And, too, Irene felt that she was just about to remember her. For about
the woman was some quality, an intangible something, too vague to
define, too remote to seize, but which was, to Irene Redfield, very
familiar. And that voice. Surely she’d heard those husky tones somewhere
before. Perhaps before time, contact, or something had been at them,
making them into a voice remotely suggesting England. Ah! Could it have
been in Europe that they had met? ’Rene. No.

“Perhaps,” Irene began, “you——”

The woman laughed, a lovely laugh, a small sequence of notes that was
like a trill and also like the ringing of a delicate bell fashioned of a
precious metal, a tinkling.

Irene drew a quick sharp breath. “Clare!” she exclaimed, “not really
Clare Kendry?”

So great was her astonishment that she had started to rise.

“No, no, don’t get up,” Clare Kendry commanded, and sat down herself.
“You’ve simply got to stay and talk. We’ll have something more. Tea?
Fancy meeting you here! It’s simply too, too lucky!”

“It’s awfully surprising,” Irene told her, and, seeing the change in
Clare’s smile, knew that she had revealed a corner of her own thoughts.
But she only said: “I’d never in this world have known you if you hadn’t
laughed. You are changed, you know. And yet, in a way, you’re just the
same.”

“Perhaps,” Clare replied. “Oh, just a second.”

She gave her attention to the waiter at her side. “M-mm, let’s see. Two
teas. And bring some cigarettes. Y-es, they’ll be all right. Thanks.”
Again that odd upward smile. Now, Irene was sure that it was too
provocative for a waiter.

While Clare had been giving the order, Irene made a rapid mental
calculation. It must be, she figured, all of twelve years since she, or
anybody that she knew, had laid eyes on Clare Kendry.

After her father’s death she’d gone to live with some relatives, aunts
or cousins two or three times removed, over on the west side: relatives
that nobody had known the Kendrys’ possessed until they had turned up at
the funeral and taken Clare away with them.

For about a year or more afterwards she would appear occasionally among
her old friends and acquaintances on the south side for short little
visits that were, they understood, always stolen from the endless
domestic tasks in her new home. With each succeeding one she was taller,
shabbier, and more belligerently sensitive. And each time the look on
her face was more resentful and brooding. “I’m worried about Clare, she
seems so unhappy,” Irene remembered her mother saying. The visits
dwindled, becoming shorter, fewer, and further apart until at last they
ceased.

Irene’s father, who had been fond of Bob Kendry, made a special trip
over to the west side about two months after the last time Clare had
been to see them and returned with the bare information that he had seen
the relatives and that Clare had disappeared. What else he had confided
to her mother, in the privacy of their own room, Irene didn’t know.

But she had had something more than a vague suspicion of its nature. For
there had been rumours. Rumours that were, to girls of eighteen and
nineteen years, interesting and exciting.

There was the one about Clare Kendry’s having been seen at the dinner
hour in a fashionable hotel in company with another woman and two men,
all of them white. And dressed! And there was another which told of her
driving in Lincoln Park with a man, unmistakably white, and evidently
rich. Packard limousine, chauffeur in livery, and all that. There had
been others whose context Irene could no longer recollect, but all
pointing in the same glamorous direction.

And she could remember quite vividly how, when they used to repeat and
discuss these tantalizing stories about Clare, the girls would always
look knowingly at one another and then, with little excited giggles,
drag away their eager shining eyes and say with lurking undertones of
regret or disbelief some such thing as: “Oh, well, maybe she’s got a job
or something,” or “After all, it mayn’t have been Clare,” or “You can’t
believe all you hear.”

And always some girl, more matter-of-fact or more frankly malicious than
the rest, would declare: “Of course it was Clare! Ruth said it was and
so did Frank, and they certainly know her when they see her as well as
we do.” And someone else would say: “Yes, you can bet it was Clare all
right.” And then they would all join in asserting that there could be no
mistake about it’s having been Clare, and that such circumstances could
mean only one thing. Working indeed! People didn’t take their servants
to the Shelby for dinner. Certainly not all dressed up like that. There
would follow insincere regrets, and somebody would say: “Poor girl, I
suppose it’s true enough, but what can you expect. Look at her father.
And her mother, they say, would have run away if she hadn’t died.
Besides, Clare always had a—a—having way with her.”

Precisely that! The words came to Irene as she sat there on the Drayton
roof, facing Clare Kendry. “A having way.” Well, Irene acknowledged,
judging from her appearance and manner, Clare seemed certainly to have
succeeded in having a few of the things that she wanted.

It was, Irene repeated, after the interval of the waiter, a great
surprise and a very pleasant one to see Clare again after all those
years, twelve at least.

“Why, Clare, you’re the last person in the world I’d have expected to
run into. I guess that’s why I didn’t know you.”

Clare answered gravely: “Yes. It is twelve years. But I’m not surprised
to see you, ’Rene. That is, not so very. In fact, ever since I’ve been
here, I’ve more or less hoped that I should, or someone. Preferably you,
though. Still, I imagine that’s because I’ve thought of you often and
often, while you—I’ll wager you’ve never given me a thought.”

It was true, of course. After the first speculations and indictments,
Clare had gone completely from Irene’s thoughts. And from the thoughts
of others too—if their conversation was any indication of their
thoughts.

Besides, Clare had never been exactly one of the group, just as she’d
never been merely the janitor’s daughter, but the daughter of Mr. Bob
Kendry, who, it was true, was a janitor, but who also, it seemed, had
been in college with some of their fathers. Just how or why he happened
to be a janitor, and a very inefficient one at that, they none of them
quite knew. One of Irene’s brothers, who had put the question to their
father, had been told: “That’s something that doesn’t concern you,” and
given him the advice to be careful not to end in the same manner as
“poor Bob.”

No, Irene hadn’t thought of Clare Kendry. Her own life had been too
crowded. So, she supposed, had the lives of other people. She defended
her—their— forgetfulness. “You know how it is. Everybody’s so busy.
People leave, drop out, maybe for a little while there’s talk about
them, or questions; then, gradually they’re forgotten.”

“Yes, that’s natural,” Clare agreed. And what, she inquired, had they
said of her for that little while at the beginning before they’d
forgotten her altogether?

Irene looked away. She felt the telltale colour rising in her cheeks.
“You can’t,” she evaded, “expect me to remember trifles like that over
twelve years of marriages, births, deaths, and the war.”

There followed that trill of notes that was Clare Kendry’s laugh, small
and clear and the very essence of mockery.

“Oh, ’Rene!” she cried, “of course you remember! But I won’t make you
tell me, because I know just as well as if I’d been there and heard
every unkind word. Oh, I know, I know. Frank Danton saw me in the Shelby
one night. Don’t tell me he didn’t broadcast that, and with embroidery.
Others may have seen me at other times. I don’t know. But once I met
Margaret Hammer in Marshall Field’s. I’d have spoken, was on the very
point of doing it, but she cut me dead. My dear ’Rene, I assure you that
from the way she looked through me, even I was uncertain whether I was
actually there in the flesh or not. I remember it clearly, too clearly.
It was that very thing which, in a way, finally decided me not to go out
and see you one last time before I went away to stay. Somehow, good as
all of you, the whole family, had always been to the poor forlorn child
that was me, I felt I shouldn’t be able to bear that. I mean if any of
you, your mother or the boys or— Oh, well, I just felt I’d rather not
know it if you did. And so I stayed away. Silly, I suppose. Sometimes
I’ve been sorry I didn’t go.”

Irene wondered if it was tears that made Clare’s eyes so luminous.

“And now ’Rene, I want to hear all about you and everybody and
everything. You’re married, I s’pose?”

Irene nodded.

“Yes,” Clare said knowingly, “you would be. Tell me about it.”

And so for an hour or more they had sat there smoking and drinking tea
and filling in the gap of twelve years with talk. That is, Irene did.
She told Clare about her marriage and removal to New York, about her
husband, and about her two sons, who were having their first experience
of being separated from their parents at a summer camp, about her
mother’s death, about the marriages of her two brothers. She told of the
marriages, births and deaths in other families that Clare had known,
opening up, for her, new vistas on the lives of old friends and
acquaintances.

Clare drank it all in, these things which for so long she had wanted to
know and hadn’t been able to learn. She sat motionless, her bright lips
slightly parted, her whole face lit by the radiance of her happy eyes.
Now and then she put a question, but for the most part she was silent.

Somewhere outside, a clock struck. Brought back to the present, Irene
looked down at her watch and exclaimed: “Oh, I must go, Clare!”

A moment passed during which she was the prey of uneasiness. It had
suddenly occurred to her that she hadn’t asked Clare anything about her
own life and that she had a very definite unwillingness to do so. And
she was quite well aware of the reason for that reluctance. But, she
asked herself, wouldn’t it, all things considered, be the kindest thing
not to ask? If things with Clare were as she—as they all—had suspected,
wouldn’t it be more tactful to seem to forget to inquire how she had
spent those twelve years?

If? It was that “if” which bothered her. It might be, it might just be,
in spite of all gossip and even appearances to the contrary, that there
was nothing, had been nothing, that couldn’t be simply and innocently
explained. Appearances, she knew now, had a way sometimes of not fitting
facts, and if Clare hadn’t— Well, if they had all been wrong, then
certainly she ought to express some interest in what had happened to
her. It would seem queer and rude if she didn’t. But how was she to
know? There was, she at last decided, no way; so she merely said again:
“I must go, Clare.”

“Please, not so soon, ’Rene,” Clare begged, not moving.

Irene thought: “She’s really almost too good-looking. It’s hardly any
wonder that she——”

“And now, ’Rene dear, that I’ve found you, I mean to see lots and lots
of you. We’re here for a month at least. Jack, that’s my husband, is
here on business. Poor dear! in this heat. Isn’t it beastly? Come to
dinner with us tonight, won’t you?” And she gave Irene a curious little
sidelong glance and a sly, ironical smile peeped out on her full red
lips, as if she had been in the secret of the other’s thoughts and was
mocking her.

Irene was conscious of a sharp intake of breath, but whether it was
relief or chagrin that she felt, she herself could not have told. She
said hastily: “I’m afraid I can’t, Clare. I’m filled up. Dinner and
bridge. I’m so sorry.”

“Come tomorrow instead, to tea,” Clare insisted. “Then you’ll see
Margery—she’s just ten—and Jack too, maybe, if he hasn’t got an
appointment or something.”

From Irene came an uneasy little laugh. She had an engagement for
tomorrow also and she was afraid that Clare would not believe it.
Suddenly, now, that possibility disturbed her. Therefore it was with a
half-vexed feeling at the sense of undeserved guilt that had come upon
her that she explained that it wouldn’t be possible because she wouldn’t
be free for tea, or for luncheon or dinner either. “And the next day’s
Friday when I’ll be going away for the weekend, Idlewild, you know. It’s
quite the thing now.” And then she had an inspiration.

“Clare!” she exclaimed, “why don’t you come up with me? Our place is
probably full up—Jim’s wife has a way of collecting mobs of the most
impossible people—but we can always manage to find room for one more.
And you’ll see absolutely everybody.”

In the very moment of giving the invitation she regretted it. What a
foolish, what an idiotic impulse to have given way to! She groaned
inwardly as she thought of the endless explanations in which it would
involve her, of the curiosity, and the talk, and the lifted eyebrows. It
wasn’t she assured herself, that she was a snob, that she cared greatly
for the petty restrictions and distinctions with which what called
itself Negro society chose to hedge itself about; but that she had a
natural and deeply rooted aversion to the kind of front-page notoriety
that Clare Kendry’s presence in Idlewild, as her guest, would expose her
to. And here she was, perversely and against all reason, inviting her.

But Clare shook her head. “Really, I’d love to, ’Rene,” she said, a
little mournfully. “There’s nothing I’d like better. But I couldn’t. I
mustn’t, you see. It wouldn’t do at all. I’m sure you understand. I’m
simply crazy to go, but I can’t.” The dark eyes glistened and there was
a suspicion of a quaver in the husky voice. “And believe me, ’Rene, I do
thank you for asking me. Don’t think I’ve entirely forgotten just what
it would mean for you if I went. That is, if you still care about such
things.”

All indication of tears had gone from her eyes and voice, and Irene
Redfield, searching her face, had an offended feeling that behind what
was now only an ivory mask lurked a scornful amusement. She looked away,
at the wall far beyond Clare. Well, she deserved it, for, as she
acknowledged to herself, she was relieved. And for the very reason at
which Clare had hinted. The fact that Clare had guessed her perturbation
did not, however, in any degree lessen that relief. She was annoyed at
having been detected in what might seem to be an insincerity; but that
was all.

The waiter came with Clare’s change. Irene reminded herself that she
ought immediately to go. But she didn’t move.

The truth was, she was curious. There were things that she wanted to ask
Clare Kendry. She wished to find out about this hazardous business of
“passing,” this breaking away from all that was familiar and friendly to
take one’s chance in another environment, not entirely strange, perhaps,
but certainly not entirely friendly. What, for example, one did about
background, how one accounted for oneself. And how one felt when one
came into contact with other Negroes. But she couldn’t. She was unable
to think of a single question that in its context or its phrasing was
not too frankly curious, if not actually impertinent.

As if aware of her desire and her hesitation, Clare remarked,
thoughtfully: “You know, ‘Rene, I’ve often wondered why more coloured
girls, girls like you and Margaret Hammer and Esther Dawson and—oh, lots
of others—never ’passed’ over. It’s such a frightfully easy thing to do.
If one’s the type, all that’s needed is a little nerve.”

“What about background? Family, I mean. Surely you can’t just drop down
on people from nowhere and expect them to receive you with open arms,
can you?”

“Almost,” Clare asserted. “You’d be surprised, ’Rene, how much easier
that is with white people than with us. Maybe because there are so many
more of them, or maybe because they are secure and so don’t have to
bother. I’ve never quite decided.”

Irene was inclined to be incredulous. “You mean that you didn’t have to
explain where you came from? It seems impossible.”

Clare cast a glance of repressed amusement across the table at her. “As
a matter of fact, I didn’t. Though I suppose under any other
circumstances I might have had to provide some plausible tale to account
for myself. I’ve a good imagination, so I’m sure I could have done it
quite creditably, and credibly. But it wasn’t necessary. There were my
aunts, you see, respectable and authentic enough for anything or
anybody.”

“I see. They were ‘passing’ too.”

“No. They weren’t. They were white.”

“Oh!” And in the next instant it came back to Irene that she had heard
this mentioned before; by her father, or, more likely, her mother. They
were Bob Kendry’s aunts. He had been a son of their brother’s, on the
left hand. A wild oat.

“They were nice old ladies,” Clare explained, “very religious and as
poor as church mice. That adored brother of theirs, my grandfather, got
through every penny they had after he’d finished his own little bit.”

Clare paused in her narrative to light another cigarette. Her smile, her
expression, Irene noticed, was faintly resentful.

“Being good Christians,” she continued, “when dad came to his tipsy end,
they did their duty and gave me a home of sorts. I was, it was true,
expected to earn my keep by doing all the housework and most of the
washing. But do you realize, ’Rene, that if it hadn’t been for them, I
shouldn’t have had a home in the world?”

Irene’s nod and little murmur were comprehensive, understanding.

Clare made a small mischievous grimace and proceeded. “Besides, to their
notion, hard labour was good for me. I had Negro blood and they belonged
to the generation that had written and read long articles headed: ‘Will
the Blacks Work?’ Too, they weren’t quite sure that the good God hadn’t
intended the sons and daughters of Ham to sweat because he had poked fun
at old man Noah once when he had taken a drop too much. I remember the
aunts telling me that that old drunkard had cursed Ham and his sons for
all time.”

Irene laughed. But Clare remained quite serious.

“It was more than a joke, I assure you, ’Rene. It was a hard life for a
girl of sixteen. Still, I had a roof over my head, and food, and
clothes—such as they were. And there were the Scriptures, and talks on
morals and thrift and industry and the loving-kindness of the good
Lord.”

“Have you ever stopped to think, Clare,” Irene demanded, “how much
unhappiness and downright cruelty are laid to the loving-kindness of the
Lord? And always by His most ardent followers, it seems.”

“Have I?” Clare exclaimed. “It, they, made me what I am today. For, of
course, I was determined to get away, to be a person and not a charity
or a problem, or even a daughter of the indiscreet Ham. Then, too, I
wanted things. I knew I wasn’t bad-looking and that I could ‘pass.’ You
can’t know, ’Rene, how, when I used to go over to the south side, I used
almost to hate all of you. You had all the things I wanted and never had
had. It made me all the more determined to get them, and others. Do you,
can you understand what I felt?”

She looked up with a pointed and appealing effect, and, evidently
finding the sympathetic expression on Irene’s face sufficient answer,
went on. “The aunts were queer. For all their Bibles and praying and
ranting about honesty, they didn’t want anyone to know that their
darling brother had seduced—ruined, they called it—a Negro girl. They
could excuse the ruin, but they couldn’t forgive the tar-brush. They
forbade me to mention Negroes to the neighbours, or even to mention the
south side. You may be sure that I didn’t. I’ll bet they were good and
sorry afterwards.”

She laughed and the ringing bells in her laugh had a hard metallic
sound.

“When the chance to get away came, that omission was of great value to
me. When Jack, a schoolboy acquaintance of some people in the
neighbourhood, turned up from South America with untold gold, there was
no one to tell him that I was coloured, and many to tell him about the
severity and the religiousness of Aunt Grace and Aunt Edna. You can
guess the rest. After he came, I stopped slipping off to the south side
and slipped off to meet him instead. I couldn’t manage both. In the end
I had no great difficulty in convincing him that it was useless to talk
marriage to the aunts. So on the day that I was eighteen, we went off
and were married. So that’s that. Nothing could have been easier.”

“Yes, I do see that for you it was easy enough. By the way! I wonder why
they didn’t tell father that you were married. He went over to find out
about you when you stopped coming over to see us. I’m sure they didn’t
tell him. Not that you were married.”

Clare Kendry’s eyes were bright with tears that didn’t fall. “Oh, how
lovely! To have cared enough about me to do that. The dear sweet man!
Well, they couldn’t tell him because they didn’t know it. I took care of
that, for I couldn’t be sure that those consciences of theirs wouldn’t
begin to work on them afterwards and make them let the cat out of the
bag. The old things probably thought I was living in sin, wherever I
was. And it would be about what they expected.”

An amused smile lit the lovely face for the smallest fraction of a
second. After a little silence she said soberly: “But I’m sorry if they
told your father so. That was something I hadn’t counted on.”

“I’m not sure that they did,” Irene told her. “He didn’t say so,
anyway.”

“He wouldn’t, ’Rene dear. Not your father.”

“Thanks. I’m sure he wouldn’t.”

“But you’ve never answered my question. Tell me, honestly, haven’t you
ever thought of ‘passing’?”

Irene answered promptly: “No. Why should I?” And so disdainful was her
voice and manner that Clare’s face flushed and her eyes glinted. Irene
hastened to add: “You see, Clare, I’ve everything I want. Except,
perhaps, a little more money.”

At that Clare laughed, her spark of anger vanished as quickly as it had
appeared. “Of course,” she declared, “that’s what everybody wants, just
a little more money, even the people who have it. And I must say I don’t
blame them. Money’s awfully nice to have. In fact, all things
considered, I think, ’Rene, that it’s even worth the price.”

Irene could only shrug her shoulders. Her reason partly agreed, her
instinct wholly rebelled. And she could not say why. And though
conscious that if she didn’t hurry away, she was going to be late to
dinner, she still lingered. It was as if the woman sitting on the other
side of the table, a girl that she had known, who had done this rather
dangerous and, to Irene Redfield, abhorrent thing successfully and had
announced herself well satisfied, had for her a fascination, strange and
compelling.

Clare Kendry was still leaning back in the tall chair, her sloping
shoulders against the carved top. She sat with an air of indifferent
assurance, as if arranged for, desired. About her clung that dim
suggestion of polite insolence with which a few women are born and which
some acquire with the coming of riches or importance.

Clare, it gave Irene a little prick of satisfaction to recall, hadn’t
got that by passing herself off as white. She herself had always had it.

Just as she’d always had that pale gold hair, which, unsheared still,
was drawn loosely back from a broad brow, partly hidden by the small
close hat. Her lips, painted a brilliant geranium-red, were sweet and
sensitive and a little obstinate. A tempting mouth. The face across the
forehead and cheeks was a trifle too wide, but the ivory skin had a
peculiar soft lustre. And the eyes were magnificent! dark, sometimes
absolutely black, always luminous, and set in long, black lashes.
Arresting eyes, slow and mesmeric, and with, for all their warmth,
something withdrawn and secret about them.

Ah! Surely! They were Negro eyes! mysterious and concealing. And set in
that ivory face under that bright hair, there was about them something
exotic.

Yes, Clare Kendry’s loveliness was absolute, beyond challenge, thanks to
those eyes which her grandmother and later her mother and father had
given her.

Into those eyes there came a smile and over Irene the sense of being
petted and caressed. She smiled back.

“Maybe,” Clare suggested, “you can come Monday, if you’re back. Or, if
you’re not, then Tuesday.”

With a small regretful sigh, Irene informed Clare that she was afraid
she wouldn’t be back by Monday and that she was sure she had dozens of
things for Tuesday, and that she was leaving Wednesday. It might be,
however, that she could get out of something Tuesday.

“Oh, do try. Do put somebody else off. The others can see you any time,
while I—Why, I may never see you again! Think of that, ’Rene! You’ll
have to come. You’ll simply have to! I’ll never forgive you if you
don’t.”

At that moment it seemed a dreadful thing to think of never seeing Clare
Kendry again. Standing there under the appeal, the caress, of her eyes,
Irene had the desire, the hope, that this parting wouldn’t be the last.

“I’ll try, Clare,” she promised gently. “I’ll call you—or will you call
me?”

“I think, perhaps, I’d better call you. Your father’s in the book, I
know, and the address is the same. Sixty-four eighteen. Some memory,
what? Now remember, I’m going to expect you. You’ve got to be able to
come.”

Again that peculiar mellowing smile.

“I’ll do my best, Clare.”

Irene gathered up her gloves and bag. They stood up. She put out her
hand. Clare took and held it.

“It has been nice seeing you again, Clare. How pleased and glad
father’ll be to hear about you!”

“Until Tuesday, then,” Clare Kendry replied. “I’ll spend every minute of
the time from now on looking forward to seeing you again. Good-bye,
’Rene dear. My love to your father, and this kiss for him.”

The sun had gone from overhead, but the streets were still like fiery
furnaces. The languid breeze was still hot. And the scurrying people
looked even more wilted than before Irene had fled from their contact.

Crossing the avenue in the heat, far from the coolness of the Drayton’s
roof, away from the seduction of Clare Kendry’s smile, she was aware of
a sense of irritation with herself because she had been pleased and a
little flattered at the other’s obvious gladness at their meeting.

With her perspiring progress homeward this irritation grew, and she
began to wonder just what had possessed her to make her promise to find
time, in the crowded days that remained of her visit, to spend another
afternoon with a woman whose life had so definitely and deliberately
diverged from hers; and whom, as had been pointed out, she might never
see again.

Why in the world had she made such a promise?

As she went up the steps to her father’s house, thinking with what
interest and amazement he would listen to her story of the afternoon’s
encounter, it came to her that Clare had omitted to mention her marriage
name. She had referred to her husband as Jack. That was all. Had that,
Irene asked herself, been intentional?

Clare had only to pick up the telephone to communicate with her, or to
drop her a card, or to jump into a taxi. But she couldn’t reach Clare in
any way. Nor could anyone else to whom she might speak of their meeting.

“As if I should!”

Her key turned in the lock. She went in. Her father, it seemed, hadn’t
come in yet.

Irene decided that she wouldn’t, after all, say anything to him about
Clare Kendry. She had, she told herself, no inclination to speak of a
person who held so low an opinion of her loyalty, or her discretion. And
certainly she had no desire or intention of making the slightest effort
about Tuesday. Nor any other day for that matter.

She was through with Clare Kendry.

Three

On Tuesday morning a dome of grey sky rose over the parched city, but
the stifling air was not relieved by the silvery mist that seemed to
hold a promise of rain, which did not fall.

To Irene Redfield this soft foreboding fog was another reason for doing
nothing about seeing Clare Kendry that afternoon.

But she did see her.

The telephone. For hours it had rung like something possessed. Since
nine o’clock she had been hearing its insistent jangle. Awhile she was
resolute, saying firmly each time: “Not in, Liza, take the message.” And
each time the servant returned with the information: “It’s the same
lady, ma’am; she says she’ll call again.”

But at noon, her nerves frayed and her conscience smiting her at the
reproachful look on Liza’s ebony face as she withdrew for another
denial, Irene weakened.

“Oh, never mind. I’ll answer this time, Liza.”

“It’s her again.”

“Hello.Yes.”

“It’s Clare, ’Rene.Where have you been?Can you be here around
four?What?But, ’Rene, you promised! Just for a little while.You can if
you want to.I am so disappointed. I had counted so on seeing you.Please
be nice and come. Only for a minute. I’m sure you can manage it if you
try.I won’t beg you to stay.Yes.I’m going to expect youIt’s the
MorganOh, yes! The name’s Bellew, Mrs. John Bellew.About four, then.I’ll
be so happy to see you\!Goodbye.”

“Damn!”

Irene hung up the receiver with an emphatic bang, her thoughts
immediately filled with self-reproach. She’d done it again. Allowed
Clare Kendry to persuade her into promising to do something for which
she had neither time nor any special desire. What was it about Clare’s
voice that was so appealing, so very seductive?

Clare met her in the hall with a kiss. She said: “You’re good to come,
’Rene. But, then, you always were nice to me.” And under her potent
smile a part of Irene’s annoyance with herself fled. She was even a
little glad that she had come.

Clare led the way, stepping lightly, towards a room whose door was
standing partly open, saying: “There’s a surprise. It’s a real party.
See.”

Entering, Irene found herself in a sitting-room, large and high, at
whose windows hung startling blue draperies which triumphantly dragged
attention from the gloomy chocolate-coloured furniture. And Clare was
wearing a thin floating dress of the same shade of blue, which suited
her and the rather difficult room to perfection.

For a minute Irene thought the room was empty, but turning her head, she
discovered, sunk deep in the cushions of a huge sofa, a woman staring up
at her with such intense concentration that her eyelids were drawn as
though the strain of that upward glance had paralysed them. At first
Irene took her to be a stranger, but in the next instant she said in an
unsympathetic, almost harsh voice: “And how are you, Gertrude?”

The woman nodded and forced a smile to her pouting lips. “I’m all
right,” she replied. “And you’re just the same, Irene. Not changed a
bit.”

“Thank you.” Irene responded, as she chose a seat. She was thinking:
“Great goodness! Two of them.”

For Gertrude too had married a white man, though it couldn’t be
truthfully said that she was “passing.” Her husband—what was his
name?—had been in school with her and had been quite well aware, as had
his family and most of his friends, that she was a Negro. It hadn’t,
Irene knew, seemed to matter to him then. Did it now, she wondered? Had
Fred—Fred Martin, that was it—had he ever regretted his marriage because
of Gertrude’s race? Had Gertrude?

Turning to Gertrude, Irene asked: “And Fred, how is he? It’s
unmentionable years since I’ve seen him.”

“Oh, he’s all right,” Gertrude answered briefly.

For a full minute no one spoke. Finally out of the oppressive little
silence Clare’s voice came pleasantly, conversationally: “We’ll have tea
right away. I know that you can’t stay long, ’Rene. And I’m so sorry you
won’t see Margery. We went up the lake over the week end to see some of
Jack’s people, just out of Milwaukee. Margery wanted to stay with the
children. It seemed a shame not to let her, especially since it’s so hot
in town. But I’m expecting Jack any second.”

Irene said briefly: “That’s nice.”

Gertrude remained silent. She was, it was plain, a little ill at ease.
And her presence there annoyed Irene, roused in her a defensive and
resentful feeling for which she had at the moment no explanation. But it
did seem to her odd that the woman that Clare was now should have
invited the woman that Gertrude was. Still, of course, Clare couldn’t
have known. Twelve years since they had met.

Later, when she examined her feeling of annoyance, Irene admitted, a
shade reluctantly, that it arose from a feeling of being outnumbered, a
sense of aloneness, in her adherence to her own class and kind; not
merely in the great thing of marriage, but in the whole pattern of her
life as well.

Clare spoke again, this time at length. Her talk was of the change that
Chicago presented to her after her long absence in European cities. Yes,
she said in reply to some question from Gertrude, she’d been back to
America a time or two, but only as far as New York and Philadelphia, and
once she had spent a few days in Washington. John Bellew, who, it
appeared, was some sort of international banking agent, hadn’t
particularly wanted her to come with him on this trip, but as soon as
she had learned that it would probably take him as far as Chicago, she
made up her mind to come anyway.

“I simply had to. And after I once got here, I was determined to see
someone I knew and find out what had happened to everybody. I didn’t
quite see how I was going to manage it, but I meant to. Somehow. I’d
just about decided to take a chance and go out to your house, ’Rene, or
call up and arrange a meeting, when I ran into you. What luck!”

Irene agreed that it was luck. “It’s the first time I’ve been home for
five years, and now I’m about to leave. A week later and I’d have been
gone. And how in the world did you find Gertrude?”

“In the book. I remembered about Fred. His father still has the meat
market.”

“Oh, yes,” said Irene, who had only remembered it as Clare had spoken,
“on Cottage Grove near——”

Gertrude broke in. “No. It’s moved. We’re on Maryland Avenue—used to be
Jackson—now. Near Sixty-third Street. And the market’s Fred’s. His
name’s the same as his father’s.”

Gertrude, Irene thought, looked as if her husband might be a butcher.
There was left of her youthful prettiness, which had been so much
admired in their high-school days, no trace. She had grown broad, fat
almost, and though there were no lines on her large white face, its very
smoothness was somehow prematurely ageing. Her black hair was clipt, and
by some unfortunate means all the live curliness had gone from it. Her
over-trimmed Georgette crêpe dress was too short and showed an appalling
amount of leg, stout legs in sleazy stockings of a vivid rose-beige
shade. Her plump hands wee newly and not too competently manicured—for
the occasion, probably. And she wasn’t smoking.

Clare said—and Irene fancied that her husky voice held a slight
edge—“Before you came, Irene, Gertrude was telling me about her two
boys. Twins. Think of it! Isn’t it too marvellous for words?”

Irene felt a warmness creeping into her cheeks. Uncanny, the way Clare
could divine what one was thinking. She was a little put out, but her
manner was entirely easy as she said: “That is nice. I’ve two boys
myself, Gertrude. Not twins, though. It seems that Clare’s rather
behind, doesn’t it?”

Gertrude, however, wasn’t sure that Clare hadn’t the best of it. “She’s
got a girl. I wanted a girl. So did Fred.”

“Isn’t that a bit unusual?” Irene asked. “Most men want sons. Egotism, I
suppose.”

“Well, Fred didn’t.”

The tea-things had been placed on a low table at Clare’s side. She gave
them her attention now, pouring the rich amber fluid from the tall glass
pitcher into stately slim glasses, which she handed to her guests, and
then offered them lemon or cream and tiny sandwiches or cakes.

After taking up her own glass she informed them: “No, I have no boys and
I don’t think I’ll ever have any. I’m afraid. I nearly died of terror
the whole nine months before Margery was born for fear that she might be
dark. Thank goodness, she turned out all right. But I’ll never risk it
again. Never! The strain is simply too—too hellish.”

Gertrude Martin nodded in complete comprehension.

This time it was Irene who said nothing.

“You don’t have to tell me!” Gertrude said fervently. “I know what it is
all right. Maybe you don’t think I wasn’t scared to death too. Fred said
I was silly, and so did his mother. But, of course, they thought it was
just a notion I’d gotten into my head and they blamed it on my
condition. They don’t know like we do, how it might go way back, and
turn out dark no matter what colour the father and mother are.”

Perspiration stood out on her forehead. Her narrow eyes rolled first in
Clare’s, then in Irene’s direction. As she talked she waved her heavy
hands about.

“No,” she went on, “no more for me either. Not even a girl. It’s awful
the way it skips generations and then pops out. Why, he actually said he
didn’t care what colour it turned out, if I would only stop worrying
about it. But, of course, nobody wants a dark child.” Her voice was
earnest and she took for granted that her audience was in entire
agreement with her.

Irene, whose head had gone up with a quick little jerk, now said in a
voice of whose even tones she was proud: “One of my boys is dark.”

Gertrude jumped as if she had been shot at. Her eyes goggled. Her mouth
flew open. She tried to speak, but could not immediately get the words
out. Finally she managed to stammer: “Oh! And your husband, is he—is
he—er—dark, too?”

Irene, who was struggling with a flood of feelings, resentment, anger,
and contempt, was, however, still able to answer as coolly as if she had
not that sense of not belonging to and of despising the company in which
she found herself drinking iced tea from tall amber glasses on that hot
August afternoon. Her husband, she informed them quietly, couldn’t
exactly “pass.”

At that reply Clare turned on Irene her seductive caressing smile and
remarked a little scoffingly: “I do think that coloured people—we—are
too silly about some things. After all, the thing’s not important to
Irene or hundreds of others. Not awfully, even to you, Gertrude. It’s
only deserters like me who have to be afraid of freaks of the nature. As
my inestimable dad used to say, ‘Everything must be paid for.’ Now,
please one of you tell me what ever happened to Claude Jones. You know,
the tall, lanky specimen who used to wear that comical little moustache
that the girls used to laugh at so. Like a thin streak of soot. The
moustache, I mean.”

At that Gertrude shrieked with laughter. “Claude Jones!” and launched
into the story of how he was no longer a Negro or a Christian but had
become a Jew.

“A Jew!” Clare exclaimed.

“Yes, a Jew. A black Jew, he calls himself. He won’t eat ham and goes to
the synagogue on Saturday. He’s got a beard now as well as a moustache.
You’d die laughing if you saw him. He’s really too funny for words. Fred
says he’s crazy and I guess he is. Oh, he’s a scream all right, a
regular scream!” And she shrieked again.

Clare’s laugh tinkled out. “It certainly sounds funny enough. Still,
it’s his own business. If he gets along better by turning—”

At that, Irene, who was still hugging her unhappy don’t-care feeling of
rightness, broke in, saying bitingly: “It evidently doesn’t occur to
either you or Gertrude that he might possibly be sincere in changing his
religion. Surely everyone doesn’t do everything for gain.”

Clare Kendry had no need to search for the full meaning of that
utterance. She reddened slightly and retorted seriously: “Yes, I admit
that might be possible—his being sincere, I mean. It just didn’t happen
to occur to me, that’s all. I’m surprised,” and the seriousness changed
to mockery, “that you should have expected it to. Or did you really?”

“You don’t, I’m sure, imagine that that is a question that I can
answer,” Irene told her. “Not here and now.”

Gertrude’s face expressed complete bewilderment. However, seeing that
little smiles had come out on the faces of the two other women and not
recognizing them for the smiles of mutual reservations which they were,
she smiled too.

Clare began to talk, steering carefully away from anything that might
lead towards race or other thorny subjects. It was the most brilliant
exhibition of conversational weightlifting that Irene had ever seen. Her
words swept over them in charming well-modulated streams. Her laughs
tinkled and pealed. Her little stories sparkled.

Irene contributed a bare “Yes” or “No” here and there. Gertrude, a “You
don’t say!” less frequently.

For a while the illusion of general conversation was nearly perfect.
Irene felt her resentment changing gradually to a silent, somewhat
grudging admiration.

Clare talked on, her voice, her gestures colouring all she said of
wartime in France, of after-the-wartime in Germany, of the excitement at
the time of the general strike in England, of dressmakers’ openings in
Paris, of the new gaiety of Budapest.

But it couldn’t last, this verbal feat. Gertrude shifted in her seat and
fell to fidgeting with her fingers. Irene, bored at last by all this
repetition of the selfsame things that she had read all too often in
papers, magazines, and books, set down her glass and collected her bag
and handkerchief. She was smoothing out the tan fingers of her gloves
preparatory to putting them on when she heard the sound of the outer
door being opened and saw Clare spring up with an expression of relief
saying: “How lovely! Here’s Jack at exactly the right minute. You can’t
go now, ’Rene dear.”

John Bellew came into the room. The first thing that Irene noticed about
him was that he was not the man that she had seen with Clare Kendry on
the Drayton roof. This man, Clare’s husband, was a tallish person,
broadly made. His age she guessed to be somewhere between thirty-five
and forty. His hair was dark brown and waving, and he had a soft mouth,
somewhat womanish, set in an unhealthy-looking dough-coloured face. His
steel-grey opaque eyes were very much alive, moving ceaselessly between
thick bluish lids. But there was, Irene decided, nothing unusual about
him, unless it was an impression of latent physical power.

“Hello, Nig,” was his greeting to Clare.

Gertrude who had started slightly, settled back and looked covertly
towards Irene, who had caught her lip between her teeth and sat gazing
at husband and wife. It was hard to believe that even Clare Kendry would
permit this ridiculing of her race by an outsider, though he chanced to
be her husband. So he knew, then, that Clare was a Negro? From her talk
the other day Irene had understood that he didn’t. But how rude, how
positively insulting, for him to address her in that way in the presence
of guests!

In Clare’s eyes, as she presented her husband, was a queer gleam, a
jeer, it might be. Irene couldn’t define it. The mechanical professions
that attend an introduction over, she inquired: “Did you hear what Jack
called me?”

“Yes,” Gertrude answered, laughing with a dutiful eagerness.

Irene didn’t speak. Her gaze remained level on Clare’s smiling face.

The black eyes fluttered down. “Tell them, dear, why you call me that.”

The man chuckled, crinkling up his eyes, not, Irene was compelled to
acknowledge, unpleasantly. He explained: “Well, you see, it’s like this.
When we were first married, she was as white as—as—well as white as a
lily. But I declare she’s gettin’ darker and darker. I tell her if she
don’t look out, she’ll wake up one of these days and find she’s turned
into a nigger.”

He roared with laughter. Clare’s ringing bell-like laugh joined his.
Gertrude after another uneasy shift in her seat added her shrill one.
Irene, who had been sitting with lips tightly compressed, cried out:
“That’s good!” and gave way to gales of laughter. She laughed and
laughed and laughed. Tears ran down her cheeks. Her sides ached. Her
throat hurt. She laughed on and on and on, long after the others had
subsided. Until, catching sight of Clare’s face, the need for a more
quiet enjoyment of this priceless joke, and for caution, struck her. At
once she stopped.

Clare handed her husband his tea and laid her hand on his arm with an
affectionate little gesture. Speaking with confidence as well as with
amusement, she said: “My goodness, Jack! What difference would it make
if, after all these years, you were to find out that I was one or two
per cent coloured?”

Bellew put out his hand in a repudiating fling, definite and final. “Oh,
no, Nig,” he declared, “nothing like that with me. I know you’re no
nigger, so it’s all right. You can get as black as you please as far as
I’m concerned, since I know you’re no nigger. I draw the line at that.
No niggers in my family. Never have been and never will be.”

Irene’s lips trembled almost uncontrollably, but she made a desperate
effort to fight back her disastrous desire to laugh again, and
succeeded. Carefully selecting a cigarette from the lacquered box on the
tea-table before her, she turned an oblique look on Clare and
encountered her peculiar eyes fixed on her with an expression so dark
and deep and unfathomable that she had for a short moment the sensation
of gazing into the eyes of some creature utterly strange and apart. A
faint sense of danger brushed her, like the breath of a cold fog.
Absurd, her reason told her, as she accepted Bellew’s proffered light
for her cigarette. Another glance at Clare showed her smiling. So, as
one always ready to oblige, was Gertrude.

An on-looker, Irene reflected, would have thought it a most congenial
tea-party, all smiles and jokes and hilarious laughter. She said
humorously: “So you dislike Negroes, Mr. Bellew?” But her amusement was
at her thought, rather than her words.

John Bellew gave a short denying laugh. “You got me wrong there,
Mrs. Redfield. Nothing like that at all. I don’t dislike them, I hate
them. And so does Nig, for all she’s trying to turn into one. She
wouldn’t have a nigger maid around her for love nor money. Not that I’d
want her to. They give me the creeps. The black scrimy devils.”

This wasn’t funny. Had Bellew, Irene inquired, ever known any Negroes?
The defensive tone of her voice brought another start from the
uncomfortable Gertrude, and, for all her appearance of serenity, a quick
apprehensive look from Clare.

Bellew answered: “Thank the Lord, no! And never expect to! But I know
people who’ve known them, better than they know their black selves. And
I read in the papers about them. Always robbing and killing people.
And,” he added darkly, “worse.”

From Gertrude’s direction came a queer little suppressed sound, a snort
or a giggle. Irene couldn’t tell which. There was a brief silence,
during which she feared that her self control was about to prove too
frail a bridge to support her mounting anger and indignation. She had a
leaping desire to shout at the man beside her: “And you’re sitting here
surrounded by three black devils, drinking tea.”

The impulse passed, obliterated by her consciousness of the danger in
which such rashness would involve Clare, who remarked with a gentle
reprovingness: “Jack dear, I’m sure ’Rene doesn’t care to hear all about
your pet aversions. Nor Gertrude either. Maybe they read the papers too,
you know.” She smiled on him, and her smile seemed to transform him, to
soften and mellow him, as the rays of the sun does a fruit.

“All right, Nig, old girl. I’m sorry,” he apologized. Reaching over, he
playfully touched his wife’s pale hands, then turned back to Irene.
“Didn’t mean to bore you, Mrs. Redfield. Hope you’ll excuse me,” he said
sheepishly. “Clare tells me you’re living in New York. Great city, New
York. The city of the future.”

In Irene, rage had not retreated, but was held by some dam of caution
and allegiance to Clare. So, in the best casual voice she could muster,
she agreed with Bellew. Though, she reminded him, it was exactly what
Chicagoans were apt to say of their city. And all the while she was
speaking, she was thinking how amazing it was that her voice did not
tremble, that outwardly she was calm. Only her hands shook slightly. She
drew them inward from their rest in her lap and pressed the tips of her
fingers together to still them.

“Husband’s a doctor, I understand. Manhattan, or one of the other
boroughs?”

Manhattan, Irene informed him, and explained the need for Brian to be
within easy reach of certain hospitals and clinics.

“Interesting life, a doctor’s.”

“Ye-es. Hard, though. And, in a way, monotonous. Nerve-racking too.”

“Hard on the wife’s nerves at least, eh? So many lady patients.” He
laughed, enjoying, with a boyish heartiness, the hoary joke.

Irene managed a momentary smile, but her voice was sober as she said:
“Brian doesn’t care for ladies, especially sick ones. I sometimes wish
he did. It’s South America that attracts him.”

“Coming place, South America, if they ever get the niggers out of it.
It’s run over——”

“Really, Jack!” Clare’s voice was on the edge of temper.

“Honestly, Nig, I forgot.” To the others he said: “You see how
hen-pecked I am.” And to Gertrude: “You’re still in Chicago,
Mrs.—er—Mrs. Martin?”

He was, it was plain, doing his best to be agreeable to these old
friends of Clare’s. Irene had to concede that under other conditions she
might have liked him. A fairly good-looking man of amiable disposition,
evidently, and in easy circumstances. Plain and with no nonsense about
him.

Gertrude replied that Chicago was good enough for her. She’d never been
out of it and didn’t think she ever should. Her husband’s business was
there.

“Of course, of course. Can’t jump up and leave a business.”

There followed a smooth surface of talk about Chicago, New York, their
differences and their recent spectacular changes.

It was, Irene, thought, unbelievable and astonishing that four people
could sit so unruffled, so ostensibly friendly, while they were in
reality seething with anger, mortification, shame. But no, on second
thought she was forced to amend her opinion. John Bellew, most
certainly, was as undisturbed within as without. So, perhaps, was
Gertrude Martin. At least she hadn’t the mortification and shame that
Clare Kendry must be feeling, or, in such full measure, the rage and
rebellion that she, Irene, was repressing.

“More tea, ’Rene,” Clare offered.

“Thanks, no. And I must be going. I’m leaving tomorrow, you know, and
I’ve still got packing to do.”

She stood up. So did Gertrude, and Clare, and John Bellew.

“How do you like the Drayton, Mrs. Redfield?” the latter asked.

“The Drayton? Oh, very much. Very much indeed,” Irene answered, her
scornful eyes on Clare’s unrevealing face.

“Nice place, all right. Stayed there a time or two myself,” the man
informed her.

“Yes, it is nice,” Irene agreed. “Almost as good as our best New York
places.” She had withdrawn her look from Clare and was searching in her
bag for some non-existent something. Her understanding was rapidly
increasing, as was her pity and her contempt. Clare was so daring, so
lovely, and so “having.”

They gave their hands to Clare with appropriate murmurs. “So good to
have seen you.”“I do hope I’ll see you again soon.”

“Good-bye,” Clare returned. “It was good of you to come, ’Rene dear. And
you too, Gertrude.”

“Good-bye, Mr. Bellew.”“So glad to have met you.” It was Gertrude who
had said that. Irene couldn’t, she absolutely couldn’t bring herself to
utter the polite fiction or anything approaching it.

He accompanied them out into the hall, summoned the elevator.

“Good-bye,” they said again, stepping in.

Plunging downward they were silent.

They made their way through the lobby without speaking.

But as soon as they had reached the street Gertrude, in the manner of
one unable to keep bottled up for another minute that which for the last
hour she had had to retain, burst out: “My God! What an awful chance!
She must be plumb crazy.”

“Yes, it certainly seems risky,” Irene admitted.

“Risky! I should say it was. Risky! My God! What a word! And the mess
she’s liable to get herself into!”

“Still, I imagine she’s pretty safe. They don’t live here, you know. And
there’s a child. That’s a certain security.”

“It’s an awful chance, just the same,” Gertrude insisted. “I’d never in
the world have married Fred without him knowing. You can’t tell what
will turn up.”

“Yes, I do agree that it’s safer to tell. But then Bellew wouldn’t have
married her. And, after all, that’s what she wanted.”

Gertrude shook her head. “I wouldn’t be in her shoes for all the money
she’s getting out of it, when he finds out. Not with him feeling the way
he does. Gee! Wasn’t it awful? For a minute I was so mad I could have
slapped him.”

It had been, Irene acknowledged, a distinctly trying experience, as well
as a very unpleasant one. “I was more than a little angry myself.”

“And imagine her not telling us about him feeling that way! Anything
might have happened. We might have said something.”

That, Irene pointed out, was exactly like Clare Kendry. Taking a chance,
and not at all considering anyone else’s feelings.

Gertrude said: “Maybe she thought we’d think it a good joke. And I guess
you did. The way you laughed. My land! I was scared to death he might
catch on.”

“Well, it was rather a joke,” Irene told her, “on him and us and maybe
on her.”

“All the same, it’s an awful chance. I’d hate to be her.”

“She seems satisfied enough. She’s got what she wanted, and the other
day she told me it was worth it.”

But about that Gertrude was sceptical. “She’ll find out different,” was
her verdict. “She’ll find out different all right.”

Rain had begun to fall, a few scattered large drops.

The end-of-the-day crowds were scurrying in the directions of
street-cars and elevated roads.

Irene said: “You’re going south? I’m sorry. I’ve got an errand. If you
don’t mind, I’ll just say good-bye here. It has been nice seeing you,
Gertrude. Say hello to Fred for me, and to your mother if she remembers
me. Good-bye.”

She had wanted to be free of the other woman, to be alone; for she was
still sore and angry.

What right, she kept demanding of herself, had Clare Kendry to expose
her, or even Gertrude Martin, to such humiliation, such downright
insult?

And all the while, on the rushing ride out to her father’s house, Irene
Redfield was trying to understand the look on Clare’s face as she had
said good-bye. Partly mocking, it had seemed, and partly menacing. And
something else for which she could find no name. For an instant a
recrudescence of that sensation of fear which she had had while looking
into Clare’s eyes that afternoon touched her. A slight shiver ran over
her.

“It’s nothing,” she told herself. “Just somebody walking over my grave,
as the children say.” She tried a tiny laugh and was annoyed to find
that it was close to tears.

What a state she had allowed that horrible Bellew to get her into!

And late that night, even, long after the last guest had gone and the
old house was quiet, she stood at her window frowning out into the dark
rain and puzzling again over that look on Clare’s incredibly beautiful
face. She couldn’t, however, come to any conclusion about its meaning,
try as she might. It was unfathomable, utterly beyond any experience or
comprehension of hers.

She turned away from the window, at last, with a still deeper frown.
Why, after all, worry about Clare Kendry? She was well able to take care
of herself, had always been able. And there were, for Irene, other
things, more personal and more important to worry about.

Besides, her reason told her, she had only herself to blame for her
disagreeable afternoon and its attendant fears and questions. She ought
never to have gone.

Four

The next morning, the day of her departure for New York, had brought a
letter, which, at first glance, she had instinctively known came from
Clare Kendry, though she couldn’t remember ever having had a letter from
her before. Ripping it open and looking at the signature, she saw that
she had been right in her guess. She wouldn’t, she told herself, read
it. She hadn’t the time. And, besides, she had no wish to be reminded of
the afternoon before. As it was, she felt none too fresh for her
journey; she had had a wretched night. And all because of Clare’s innate
lack of consideration for the feelings of others.

But she did read it. After father and friends had waved good-bye, and
she was being hurled eastward, she became possessed of an uncontrollable
curiosity to see what Clare had said about yesterday. For what, she
asked, as she took it out of her bag and opened it, could she, what
could anyone, say about a thing like that?

Clare Kendry had said:

’Rene dear:

However am I to thank you for your visit? I know you are feeling that
under the circumstances I ought not to have asked you to come, or,
rather, insisted. But if you could know how glad, how excitingly happy,
I was to meet you and how I ached to see more of you (to see everybody
and couldn’t), you would understand my wanting to see you again, and
maybe forgive me a little.

My love to you always and always and to your dear father, and all my
poor thanks.

Clare.

And there was a postscript which said:

It may be, ’Rene dear, it may just be, that, after all, your way may be
the wiser and infinitely happier one. I’m not sure just now. At least
not so sure as I have been.

C.  

But the letter hadn’t conciliated Irene. Her indignation was not
lessened by Clare’s flattering reference to her wiseness. As if, she
thought wrathfully, anything could take away the humiliation, or any
part of it, of what she had gone through yesterday afternoon for Clare
Kendry.

With an unusual methodicalness she tore the offending letter into tiny
ragged squares that fluttered down and made a small heap in her black
crêpe de Chine lap. The destruction completed, she gathered them up,
rose, and moved to the train’s end. Standing there, she dropped them
over the railing and watched them scatter, on tracks, on cinders, on
forlorn grass, in rills of dirty water.

And that, she told herself, was that. The chances were one in a million
that she would ever again lay eyes on Clare Kendry. If, however, that
millionth chance should turn up, she had only to turn away her eyes, to
refuse her recognition.

She dropped Clare out of her mind and turned her thoughts to her own
affairs. To home, to the boys, to Brian. Brian, who in the morning would
be waiting for her in the great clamourous station. She hoped that he
had been comfortable and not too lonely without her and the boys. Not so
lonely that that old, queer, unhappy restlessness had begun again within
him, that craving for some place strange and different, which at the
beginning of her marriage she had had to make such strenuous efforts to
repress, and which yet faintly alarmed her, though it now sprang up at
gradually lessening intervals.

Part Two: Re-Encounter

One

Such were Irene Redfield’s memories as she sat there in her room, a
flood of October sunlight streaming in upon her, holding that second
letter of Clare Kendry’s.

Laying it aside, she regarded with an astonishment that had in it a mild
degree of amusement the violence of the feelings which it stirred in
her.

It wasn’t the great measure of anger that surprised and slightly amused
her. That, she was certain, was justified and reasonable, as was the
fact that it could hold, still strong and unabated, across the stretch
of two years’ time entirely removed from any sight or sound of John
Bellew, or of Clare. That even at this remote date the memory of the
man’s words and manner had power to set her hands to trembling and to
send the blood pounding against her temples did not seem to her
extraordinary. But that she should retain that dim sense of fear, of
panic, was surprising, silly.

That Clare should have written, should even all things considered, have
expressed a desire to see her again, did not so much amaze her. To count
as nothing the annoyances, the bitterness, or the suffering of others,
that was Clare.

Well—Irene’s shoulders went up—one thing was sure: that she needn’t, and
didn’t intend to, lay herself open to any repetition of a humiliation as
galling and outrageous as that which, for Clare Kendry’s sake, she had
borne “that time in Chicago.” Once was enough.

If, at the time of choosing, Clare hadn’t precisely reckoned the cost,
she had, nevertheless, no right to expect others to help make up the
reckoning. The trouble with Clare was, not only that she wanted to have
her cake and eat it too, but that she wanted to nibble at the cakes of
other folk as well.

Irene Redfield found it hard to sympathize with this new tenderness,
this avowed yearning of Clare’s for “my own people.”

The letter which she just put out of her hand was, to her taste, a bit
too lavish in its wordiness, a shade too unreserved in the manner of its
expression. It roused again that old suspicion that Clare was acting,
not consciously, perhaps—that is, not too consciously— but, none the
less, acting. Nor was Irene inclined to excuse what she termed Clare’s
downright selfishness.

And mingled with her disbelief and resentment was another feeling, a
question. Why hadn’t she spoken that day? Why, in the face of Bellew’s
ignorant hate and aversion, had she concealed her own origin? Why had
she allowed him to make his assertions and express his misconceptions
undisputed? Why, simply because of Clare Kendry, who had exposed her to
such torment, had she failed to take up the defence of the race to which
she belonged?

Irene asked these questions, felt them. They were, however, merely
rhetorical, as she herself was well aware. She knew their answers, every
one, and it was the same for them all. The sardony of it! She couldn’t
betray Clare, couldn’t even run the risk of appearing to defend a people
that were being maligned, for fear that that defence might in some
infinitesimal degree lead the way to final discovery of her secret. She
had to Clare Kendry a duty. She was bound to her by those very ties of
race, which, for all her repudiation of them, Clare had been unable to
completely sever.

And it wasn’t, as Irene knew, that Clare cared at all about the race or
what was to become of it. She didn’t. Or that she had for any of its
members great, or even real, affection, though she professed undying
gratitude for the small kindnesses which the Westover family had shown
her when she was a child. Irene doubted the genuineness of it, seeing
herself only as a means to an end where Clare was concerned. Nor could
it be said that she had even the slight artistic or sociological
interest in the race that some members of other races displayed. She
hadn’t. No, Clare Kendry cared nothing for the race. She only belonged
to it.

“Not another damned thing!” Irene declared aloud as she drew a fragile
stocking over a pale beige-coloured foot.

“Aha! Swearing again, are you, madam? Caught you in the act that time.”

Brian Redfield had come into the room in that noiseless way which, in
spite, of the years of their life together, still had the power to
disconcert her. He stood looking down on her with that amused smile of
his, which was just the faintest bit supercilious and yet was somehow
very becoming to him.

Hastily Irene pulled on the other stocking and slipped her feet into the
slippers beside her chair.

“And what brought on this particular outburst of profanity? That is, if
an indulgent but perturbed husband may inquire. The mother of sons too!
The times, alas, the times!”

“I’ve had this letter,” Irene told him. “And I’m sure that anybody’ll
admit it’s enough to make a saint swear. The nerve of her!”

She passed the letter to him, and in the act made a little mental frown.
For, with a nicety of perception, she saw that she was doing it instead
of answering his question with words, so that he might be occupied while
she hurried through her dressing. For she was late again, and Brian, she
well knew, detested that. Why, oh, why, couldn’t she ever manage to be
on time? Brian had been up for ages, had made some calls for all she
knew, besides having taken the boys downtown to school. And she wasn’t
dressed yet; had only begun. Damn Clare! This morning it was her fault.

Brian sat down and bent his head over the letter, puckering his brows
slightly in his effort to make out Clare’s scrawl.

Irene, who had risen and was standing before the mirror, ran a comb
through her black hair, then tossed her head with a light characteristic
gesture, in order to disarrange a little the set locks. She touched a
powder-puff to her warm olive skin, and then put on her frock with a
motion so hasty that it was with some difficulty properly adjusted. At
last she was ready, though she didn’t immediately say so, but stood,
instead, looking with a sort of curious detachment at her husband across
the room.

Brian, she was thinking, was extremely good-looking. Not, of course,
pretty or effeminate; the slight irregularity of his nose saved him from
the prettiness, and the rather marked heaviness of his chin saved him
from the effeminacy. But he was, in a pleasant masculine way, rather
handsome. And yet, wouldn’t he, perhaps, have been merely ordinarily
good-looking but for the richness, the beauty of his skin, which was of
an exquisitely fine texture and deep copper colour.

He looked up and said: “Clare? That must be the girl you told me about
meeting the last time you were out home. The one you went to tea with?”

Irene’s answer to that was an inclination of the head.

“I’m ready,” she said.

They were going downstairs, Brian deftly, unnecessarily, piloting her
round the two short curved steps, just before the centre landing.

“You’re not,” he asked, “going to see her?”

His words, however, were in reality not a question, but, as Irene was
aware, an admonition.

Her front teeth just touched. She spoke through them, and her tones held
a thin sarcasm. “Brian, darling, I’m really not such an idiot that I
don’t realize that if a man calls me a nigger, it’s his fault the first
time, but mine if he has the opportunity to do it again.”

They went into the dining-room. He drew back her chair and she sat down
behind the fat-bellied German coffee-pot, which sent out its morning
fragrance, mingled with the smell of crisp toast and savoury bacon, in
the distance. With his long, nervous fingers he picked up the morning
paper from his own chair and sat down.

Zulena, a small mahogany-coloured creature, brought in the grapefruit.

They took up their spoons.

Out of the silence Brian spoke. Blandly. “My dear, you misunderstand me
entirely. I simply meant that I hope you’re not going to let her pester
you. She will, you know, if you give her half a chance and she’s
anything at all like your description of her. Anyway, they always do.
Besides,” he corrected, “the man, her husband, didn’t call you a nigger.
There’s a difference, you know.”

“No, certainly he didn’t. Not actually. He couldn’t, not very well,
since he didn’t know. But he would have. It amounts to the same thing.
And I’m sure it was just as unpleasant.”

“U-mm, I don’t know. But it seems to me,” he pointed out, “that you, my
dear, had all the advantage. You knew what his opinion of you was, while
he— Well, ’twas ever thus. We know, always have. They don’t. Not quite.
It has, you will admit, its humorous side, and, sometimes, its
conveniences.”

She poured the coffee.

“I can’t see it. I’m going to write Clare. Today, if I can find a
minute. It’s a thing we might as well settle definitely, and
immediately. Curious, isn’t it, that knowing, as she does, his
unqualified attitude, she still——”

Brian interrupted: “It’s always that way. Never known it to fail.
Remember Albert Hammond, how he used to be for ever haunting Seventh
Avenue, and Lenox Avenue, and the dancing-places, until some ‘shine’
took a shot at him for casting an eye towards his ‘sheba?’ They always
come back. I’ve seen it happen time and time again.”

“But why?” Irene wanted to know. “Why?”

“If I knew that, I’d know what race is.”

“But wouldn’t you think that having got the thing, or things, they were
after, and at such risk, they’d be satisfied? Or afraid?”

“Yes,” Brian agreed, “you certainly would think so. But, the fact
remains, they aren’t. Not satisfied, I mean. I think they’re scared
enough most of the time, when they give way to the urge and slip back.
Not scared enough to stop them, though. Why, the good God only knows.”

Irene leaned forward, speaking, she was aware, with a vehemence
absolutely unnecessary, but which she could not control.

“Well, Clare can just count me out. I’ve no intention of being the link
between her and her poorer darker brethren. After that scene in Chicago
too! To calmly expect me——” She stopped short, suddenly too wrathful for
words.

“Quite right. The only sensible thing to do. Let her miss you. It’s an
unhealthy business, the whole affair. Always is.”

Irene nodded. “More coffee,” she offered.

“Thanks, no.” He took up his paper again, spreading it open with a
little rattling noise.

Zulena came in bringing more toast. Brian took a slice and bit into it
with that audible crunching sound that Irene disliked so intensely, and
turned back to his paper.

She said: “It’s funny about ‘passing.’ We disapprove of it and at the
same time condone it. It excites our contempt and yet we rather admire
it. We shy away from it with an odd kind of revulsion, but we protect
it.”

“Instinct of the race to survive and expand.”

“Rot! Everything can’t be explained by some general biological phrase.”

“Absolutely everything can. Look at the so-called whites, who’ve left
bastards all over the known earth. Same thing in them. Instinct of the
race to survive and expand.”

With that Irene didn’t at all agree, but many arguments in the past had
taught her the futility of attempting to combat Brian on ground where he
was more nearly at home than she. Ignoring his unqualified assertion,
she slid away from the subject entirely.

“I wonder,” she asked, “if you’ll have time to run me down to the
printing-office. It’s on a Hundred and Sixteenth Street. I’ve got to see
about some handbills and some more tickets for the dance.”

“Yes, of course. How’s it going? Everything all set?”

“Ye-es. I guess so. The boxes are all sold and nearly all the first
batch of tickets. And we expect to take in almost as much again at the
door. Then, there’s all that cake to sell. It’s a terrible lot of work,
though.”

“I’ll bet it is. Uplifting the brother’s no easy job. I’m as busy as a
cat with fleas, myself.” And over his face there came a shadow. “Lord!
how I hate sick people, and their stupid, meddling families, and smelly,
dirty rooms, and climbing filthy steps in dark hallways.”

“Surely,” Irene began, fighting back the fear and irritation that she
felt, “surely——”

Her husband silenced her, saying sharply: “Let’s not talk about it,
please.” And immediately, in his usual, slightly mocking tone he asked:
“Are you ready to go now? I haven’t a great deal of time to wait.”

He got up. She followed him out into the hall without replying. He
picked up his soft brown hat from the small table and stood a moment
whirling it round on his long tea-coloured fingers.

Irene, watching him, was thinking: “It isn’t fair, it isn’t fair.” After
all these years to still blame her like this. Hadn’t his success proved
that she’d been right in insisting that he stick to his profession right
there in New York? Couldn’t he see, even now, that it had been best? Not
for her, oh no, not for her—she had never really considered herself—but
for him and the boys. Was she never to be free of it, that fear which
crouched, always, deep down within her, stealing away the sense of
security, the feeling of permanence, from the life which she had so
admirably arranged for them all, and desired so ardently to have remain
as it was? That strange, and to her fantastic, notion of Brian’s of
going off to Brazil, which, though unmentioned, yet lived within him;
how it frightened her, and—yes, angered her!

“Well?” he asked lightly.

“I’ll just get my things. One minute,” she promised and turned upstairs.

Her voice had been even and her step was firm, but in her there was no
slackening of the agitation, of the alarms, which Brian’s expression of
discontent had raised. He had never spoken of his desire since that
long-ago time of storm and strain, of hateful and nearly disastrous
quarrelling, when she had so firmly opposed him, so sensibly pointed out
its utter impossibility and its probable consequences to her and the
boys, and had even hinted at a dissolution of their marriage in the
event of his persistence in his idea. No, there had been, in all the
years that they had lived together since then, no other talk of it, no
more than there had been any other quarrelling or any other threats. But
because, so she insisted, the bond of flesh and spirit between them was
so strong, she knew, had always known, that his dissatisfaction had
continued, as had his dislike and disgust for his profession and his
country.

A feeling of uneasiness stole upon her at the inconceivable suspicion
that she might have been wrong in her estimate of her husband’s
character. But she squirmed away from it. Impossible! She couldn’t have
been wrong. Everything proved that she had been right. More than right,
if such a thing could be. And all, she assured herself, because she
understood him so well, because she had, actually, a special talent for
understanding him. It was, as she saw it, the one thing that had been
the basis of the success which she had made of a marriage that had
threatened to fail. She knew him as well as he knew himself, or better.

Then why worry? The thing, this discontent which had exploded into
words, would surely die, flicker out, at last. True, she had in the past
often been tempted to believe that it had died, only to become
conscious, in some instinctive, subtle way, that she had been merely
deceiving herself for a while and that it still lived. But it would die.
Of that she was certain. She had only to direct and guide her man, to
keep him going in the right direction.

She put on her coat and adjusted her hat.

Yes, it would die, as long ago she had made up her mind that it should.
But in the meantime, while it was still living and still had the power
to flare up and alarm her, it would have to be banked, smothered, and
something offered in its stead. She would have to make some plan, some
decision, at once. She frowned, for it annoyed her intensely. For,
though temporary, it would be important and perhaps disturbing. Irene
didn’t like changes, particularly changes that affected the smooth
routine of her household. Well, it couldn’t be helped. Something would
have to be done. And immediately.

She took up her purse and drawing on her gloves, ran down the steps and
out through the door which Brian held open for her and stepped into the
waiting car.

“You know,” she said, settling herself into the seat beside him, “I’m
awfully glad to get this minute alone with you. It does seem that we’re
always so busy—I do hate that—but what can we do? I’ve had something on
my mind for ever so long, something that needs talking over and really
serious consideration.”

The car’s engine rumbled as it moved out from the kerb and into the
scant traffic of the street under Brian’s expert guidance.

She studied his profile.

They turned into Seventh Avenue. Then he said: “Well, let’s have it. No
time like the present for the settling of weighty matters.”

“It’s about Junior. I wonder if he isn’t going too fast in school? We do
forget that he’s not eleven yet. Surely it can’t be good for him
to—well, if he is, I mean. Going too fast, you know. Of course, you know
more about these things than I do. You’re better able to judge. That is,
if you’ve noticed or thought about it at all.”

“I do wish, Irene, you wouldn’t be for ever fretting about those kids.
They’re all right. Perfectly all right. Good, strong, healthy boys,
especially Junior. Most especially Junior.”

“We-ll, I s’pose you’re right. You’re expected to know about things like
that, and I’m sure you wouldn’t make a mistake about your own boy.”
(Now, why had she said that?) “But that isn’t all. I’m terribly afraid
he’s picked up some queer ideas about things— some things—from the older
boys, you know.”

Her manner was consciously light. Apparently she was intent on the maze
of traffic, but she was still watching Brian’s face closely. On it was a
peculiar expression. Was it, could it possibly be, a mixture of scorn
and distaste?

“Queer ideas?” he repeated. “D’you mean ideas about sex, Irene?”

“Ye-es. Not quite nice ones. Dreadful jokes, and things like that.”

“Oh, I see,” he threw at her. For a while there was silence between
them. After a moment he demanded bluntly: “Well, what of it? If sex
isn’t a joke, what is it? And what is a joke?”

“As you please, Brian. He’s your son, you know.” Her voice was clear,
level, disapproving.

“Exactly! And you’re trying to make a mollycoddle out of him. Well, just
let me tell you, I won’t have it. And you needn’t think I’m going to let
you change him to some nice kindergarten kind of a school because he’s
getting a little necessary education. I won’t! He’ll stay right where he
is. The sooner and the more he learns about sex, the better for him. And
most certainly if he learns that it’s a grand joke, the greatest in the
world. It’ll keep him from lots of disappointments later on.”

Irene didn’t answer.

They reached the printing-shop. She got out, emphatically slamming the
car’s door behind her. There was a piercing agony of misery in her
heart. She hadn’t intended to behave like this, but her extreme
resentment at his attitude, the sense of having been wilfully
misunderstood and reproved, drove her to fury.

Inside the shop, she stilled the trembling of her lips and drove back
her rising anger. Her business transacted, she came back to the car in a
chastened mood. But against the armour of Brian’s stubborn silence she
heard herself saying in a calm, metallic voice: “I don’t believe I’ll go
back just now. I’ve remembered that I’ve got to do something about
getting something decent to wear. I haven’t a rag that’s fit to be seen.
I’ll take the bus downtown.”

Brian merely doffed his hat in that maddening polite way which so
successfully curbed and yet revealed his temper.

“Good-bye,” she said bitingly. “Thanks for the lift,” and turned towards
the avenue.

What, she wondered contritely, was she to do next? She was vexed with
herself for having chosen, as it had turned out, so clumsy an opening
for what she had intended to suggest: some European school for Junior
next year, and Brian to take him over. If she had been able to present
her plan, and he had accepted it, as she was sure that he would have
done, with other more favourable opening methods, he would have had that
to look forward to as a break in the easy monotony that seemed, for some
reason she was wholly unable to grasp, so hateful to him.

She was even more vexed at her own explosion of anger. What could have
got into her to give way to it in such a moment?

Gradually her mood passed. She drew back from the failure of her first
attempt at substitution, not so much discouraged as disappointed and
ashamed. It might be, she reflected, that, in addition to her ill-timed
loss of temper, she had been too hasty in her eagerness to distract him,
had rushed too closely on the heels of his outburst, and had thus
aroused his suspicions and his obstinacy. She had but to wait. Another
more appropriate time would come, tomorrow, next week, next month. It
wasn’t now, as it had been once, that she was afraid that he would throw
everything aside and rush off to that remote place of his heart’s
desire. He wouldn’t, she knew. He was fond of her, loved her, in his
slightly undemonstrative way.

And there were the boys.

It was only that she wanted him to be happy, resenting, however, his
inability to be so with things as they were, and never acknowledging
that though she did want him to be happy, it was only in her own way and
by some plan of hers for him that she truly desired him to be so. Nor
did she admit that all other plans, all other ways, she regarded as
menaces, more or less indirect, to that security of place and substance
which she insisted upon for her sons and in a lesser degree for herself.

Two

Five days had gone by since Clare Kendry’s appealing letter. Irene
Redfield had not replied to it. Nor had she had any other word from
Clare.

She had not carried out her first intention of writing at once because
on going back to the letter for Clare’s address, she had come upon
something which, in the rigour of her determination to maintain unbroken
between them the wall that Clare herself had raised, she had forgotten,
or not fully noted. It was the fact that Clare had requested her to
direct her answer to the post office’s general delivery.

That had angered Irene, and increased her disdain and contempt for the
other.

Tearing the letter across, she had flung it into the scrapbasket. It
wasn’t so much Clare’s carefulness and her desire for secrecy in their
relations—Irene understood the need for that—as that Clare should have
doubted her discretion, implied that she might not be cautious in the
wording of her reply and the choice of a posting-box. Having always had
complete confidence in her own good judgment and tact, Irene couldn’t
bear to have anyone seem to question them. Certainly not Clare Kendry.

In another, calmer moment she decided that it was, after all, better to
answer nothing, to explain nothing, to refuse nothing; to dispose of the
matter simply by not writing at all. Clare, of whom it couldn’t be said
that she was stupid, would not mistake the implication of that silence.
She might—and Irene was sure that she would—choose to ignore it and
write again, but that didn’t matter. The whole thing would be very easy.
The basket for all letters, silence for their answers.

Most likely she and Clare would never meet again. Well, she, for one,
could endure that. Since childhood their lives had never really touched.
Actually they were strangers. Strangers in their ways and means of
living. Strangers in their desires and ambitions. Strangers even in
their racial consciousness. Between them the barrier was just as high,
just as broad, and just as firm as if in Clare did not run that strain
of black blood. In truth, it was higher, broader, and firmer; because
for her there were perils, not known, or imagined, by those others who
had no such secrets to alarm or endanger them.

The day was getting on toward evening. It was past the middle of
October. There had been a week of cold rain, drenching the rotting
leaves which had fallen from the poor trees that lined the street on
which the Redfields’ house was located, and sending a damp air of
penetrating chill into the house, with a hint of cold days to come. In
Irene’s room a low fire was burning. Outside, only a dull grey light was
left of the day. Inside, lamps had already been lighted.

From the floor above there was the sound of young voices. Sometimes
Junior’s serious and positive; again, Ted’s deceptively gracious one.
Often there was laughter, or the noise of commotion, tussling, or toys
being slammed down.

Junior, tall for his age, was almost incredibly like his father in
feature and colouring; but his temperament was hers, practical and
determined, rather than Brian’s. Ted, speculative and withdrawn, was,
apparently, less positive in his ideas and desires. About him there was
a deceiving air of candour that was, Irene knew, like his father’s show
of reasonable acquiescence. If, for the time being, and with a charming
appearance of artlessness, he submitted to the force of superior
strength, or some other immovable condition or circumstance, it was
because of his intense dislike of scenes and unpleasant argument. Brian
over again.

Gradually Irene’s thought slipped away from Junior and Ted, to become
wholly absorbed in their father.

The old fear, with strength increased, the fear for the future, had
again laid its hand on her. And, try as she might, she could not shake
it off. It was as if she had admitted to herself that against that easy
surface of her husband’s concordance with her wishes, which had, since
the war had given him back to her physically unimpaired, covered an
increasing inclination to tear himself and his possessions loose from
their proper setting, she was helpless.

The chagrin which she had felt at her first failure to subvert this
latest manifestation of his discontent had receded, leaving in its wake
an uneasy depression. Were all her efforts, all her labours, to make up
to him that one loss, all her silent striving to prove to him that her
way had been best, all her ministrations to him, all her outward sinking
of self, to count for nothing in some unperceived sudden moment? And if
so, what, then, would be the consequences to the boys? To her? To Brian
himself? Endless searching had brought no answer to these questions.
There was only an intense weariness from their shuttle-like procession
in her brain.

The noise and commotion from above grew increasingly louder. Irene was
about to go to the stairway and request the boys to be quieter in their
play when she heard the doorbell ringing.

Now, who was that likely to be? She listened to Zulena’s heels, faintly
tapping on their way to the door, then to the shifting sound of her feet
on the steps, then to her light knock on the bedroom door.

“Yes. Come in,” Irene told her.

Zulena stood in the doorway. She said: “Someone to see you,
Mrs. Redfield.” Her tone was discreetly regretful, as if to convey that
she was reluctant to disturb her mistress at that hour, and for a
stranger. “A Mrs. Bellew.”

Clare!

“Oh dear! Tell her, Zulena,” Irene began, “that I can’t—No. I’ll see
her. Please bring her up here.”

She heard Zulena pass down the hall, down the stairs, then stood up,
smoothing out the tumbled green and ivory draperies of her dress with
light stroking pats. At the mirror she dusted a little powder on her
nose and brushed out her hair.

She meant to tell Clare Kendry at once, and definitely, that it was of
no use, her coming, that she couldn’t be responsible, that she’d talked
it over with Brian, who had agreed with her that it was wiser, for
Clare’s own sake, to refrain——

But that was as far as she got in her rehearsal. For Clare had come
softly into the room without knocking, and before Irene could greet her,
had dropped a kiss on her dark curls.

Looking at the woman before her, Irene Redfield had a sudden
inexplicable onrush of affectionate feeling. Reaching out, she grasped
Clare’s two hands in her own and cried with something like awe in her
voice: “Dear God! But aren’t you lovely, Clare!”

Clare tossed that aside. Like the furs and small blue hat which she
threw on the bed before seating herself slantwise in Irene’s favourite
chair, with one foot curled under her.

“Didn’t you mean to answer my letter, ’Rene?” she asked gravely.

Irene looked away. She had that uncomfortable feeling that one has when
one has not been wholly kind or wholly true.

Clare went on: “Every day I went to that nasty little post-office place.
I’m sure they were all beginning to think that I’d been carrying on an
illicit love-affair and that the man had thrown me over. Every morning
the same answer: ‘Nothing for you.’ I got into an awful fright, thinking
that something might have happened to your letter, or to mine. And half
the nights I would lie awake looking out at the watery stars—hopeless
things, the stars—worrying and wondering. But at last it soaked in, that
you hadn’t written and didn’t intend to. And then—well, as soon as ever
I’d seen Jack off for Florida, I came straight here. And now, ’Rene,
please tell me quite frankly why you didn’t answer my letter.”

“Because, you see——” Irene broke off and kept Clare waiting while she
lit a cigarette, blew out the match, and dropped it into a tray. She was
trying to collect her arguments, for some sixth sense warned her that it
was going to be harder than she thought to convince Clare Kendry of the
folly of Harlem for her. Finally she proceeded: “I can’t help thinking
that you ought not to come up here, ought not to run the risk of knowing
Negroes.”

“You mean you don’t want me, ’Rene?”

Irene hadn’t supposed that anyone could look so hurt. She said, quite
gently, “No, Clare, it’s not that. But even you must see that it’s
terribly foolish, and not just the right thing.”

The tinkle of Clare’s laugh rang out, while she passed her hands over
the bright sweep of her hair. “Oh, ’Rene!” she cried, “you’re priceless!
And you haven’t changed a bit. The right thing!” Leaning forward, she
looked curiously into Irene’s disapproving brown eyes. “You don’t, you
really can’t mean exactly that! Nobody could. It’s simply unbelievable.”

Irene was on her feet before she realized that she had risen. “What I
really mean,” she retorted, “is that it’s dangerous and that you ought
not to run such silly risks. No one ought to. You least of all.”

Her voice was brittle. For into her mind had come a thought, strange and
irrelevant, a suspicion, that had surprised and shocked her and driven
her to her feet. It was that in spite of her determined selfishness the
woman before her was yet capable of heights and depths of feeling that
she, Irene Redfield, had never known. Indeed, never cared to know. The
thought, the suspicion, was gone as quickly as it had come.

Clare said: “Oh, me!”

Irene touched her arm caressingly, as if in contrition for that flashing
thought. “Yes, Clare, you. It’s not safe. Not safe at all.”

“Safe!”

It seemed to Irene that Clare had snapped her teeth down on the word and
then flung it from her. And for another flying second she had that
suspicion of Clare’s ability for a quality of feeling that was to her
strange, and even repugnant. She was aware, too, of a dim premonition of
some impending disaster. It was as if Clare Kendry had said to her, for
whom safety, security, were all-important: “Safe! Damn being safe!” and
meant it.

With a gesture of impatience she sat down. In a voice of cool formality,
she said: “Brian and I have talked the whole thing over carefully and
decided that it isn’t wise. He says it’s always a dangerous business,
this coming back. He’s seen more than one come to grief because of it.
And, Clare, considering everything—Mr. Bellew’s attitude and all
that—don’t you think you ought to be as careful as you can?”

Clare’s deep voice broke the small silence that had followed Irene’s
speech. She said, speaking almost plaintively: “I ought to have known.
It’s Jack. I don’t blame you for being angry, though I must say you
behaved beautifully that day. But I did think you’d understand, ’Rene.
It was that, partly, that has made me want to see other people. It just
swooped down and changed everything. If it hadn’t been for that, I’d
have gone on to the end, never seeing any of you. But that did something
to me, and I’ve been so lonely since! You can’t know. Not close to a
single soul. Never anyone to really talk to.”

Irene pressed out her cigarette. While doing so, she saw again the
vision of Clare Kendry staring disdainfully down at the face of her
father, and thought that it would be like that that she would look at
her husband if he lay dead before her.

Her own resentment was swept aside and her voice held an accent of pity
as she exclaimed: “Why, Clare! I didn’t know. Forgive me. I feel like
seven beasts. It was stupid of me not to realize.”

“No. Not at all. You couldn’t. Nobody, none of you, could,” Clare
moaned. The black eyes filled with tears that ran down her cheeks and
spilled into her lap, ruining the priceless velvet of her dress. Her
long hands were a little uplifted and clasped tightly together. Her
effort to speak moderately was obvious, but not successful. “How could
you know? How could you? You’re free. You’re happy. And,” with faint
derision, “safe.”

Irene passed over that touch of derision, for the poignant rebellion of
the other’s words had brought the tears to her own eyes, though she
didn’t allow them to fall. The truth was that she knew weeping did not
become her. Few women, she imagined, wept as attractively as Clare. “I’m
beginning to believe,” she murmured, “that no one is ever completely
happy, or free, or safe.”

“Well, then, what does it matter? One risk more or less, if we’re not
safe anyway, if even you’re not, it can’t make all the difference in the
world. It can’t to me. Besides, I’m used to risks. And this isn’t such a
big one as you’re trying to make it.”

“Oh, but it is. And it can make all the difference in the world. There’s
your little girl, Clare. Think of the consequences to her.”

Clare’s face took on a startled look, as though she were totally
unprepared for this new weapon with which Irene had assailed her.
Seconds passed, during which she sat with stricken eyes and compressed
lips. “I think,” she said at last, “that being a mother is the cruellest
thing in the world.” Her clasped hands swayed forward and back again,
and her scarlet mouth trembled irrepressibly.

“Yes,” Irene softly agreed. For a moment she was unable to say more, so
accurately had Clare put into words that which, not so definitely
defined, was so often in her own heart of late. At the same time she was
conscious that here, to her hand, was a reason which could not be
lightly brushed aside. “Yes,” she repeated, “and the most responsible,
Clare. We mothers are all responsible for the security and happiness of
our children. Think what it would mean to your Margery if Mr. Bellew
should find out. You’d probably lose her. And even if you didn’t,
nothing that concerned her would ever be the same again. He’d never
forget that she had Negro blood. And if she should learn—Well, I believe
that after twelve it is too late to learn a thing like that. She’d never
forgive you. You may be used to risks, but this is one you mustn’t take,
Clare. It’s a selfish whim, an unnecessary and——

“Yes, Zulena, what is it?” she inquired, a trifle tartly, of the servant
who had silently materialized in the doorway.

“The telephone’s for you, Mrs. Redfield. It’s Mr. Wentworth.”

“All right. Thank you. I’ll take it here.” And, with a muttered apology
to Clare, she took up the instrument.

“Hello.Yes, Hugh.Oh, quite.And you?I’m sorry, every single thing’s
gone.Oh, too bad.Ye-es, I s’pose you could. Not very pleasant, though.…
Yes, of course, in a pinch everything goes.Wait! I’ve gotit! I’ll change
mine with whoever’s nextto you, and you can have that.No.I mean it.I’ll
be so busy I shan’t know whether I’m sitting or standing.As long as
Brian has a place to drop down now and then.Not a single soul.No,
don’t.That’s nice.My love to Bianca.I’ll see to it right away and call
you back.Good-bye.”

She hung up and turned back to Clare, a little frown on her softly
chiselled features. “It’s the N. W. L. dance,” she explained, “the Negro
Welfare League, you know. I’m on the ticket committee, or, rather, I am
the committee. Thank heaven it comes off tomorrow night and doesn’t
happen again for a year. I’m about crazy, and now I’ve got to persuade
somebody to change boxes with me.”

“That wasn’t,” Clare asked, “Hugh Wentworth? Not the Hugh Wentworth?”

Irene inclined her head. On her face was a tiny triumphant smile. “Yes,
the Hugh Wentworth. D’you know him?”

“No. How should I? But I do know about him. And I’ve read a book or two
of his.”

“Awfully good, aren’t they?”

“U-umm, I s’pose so. Sort of contemptuous, I thought. As if he more or
less despised everything and everybody.”

“I shouldn’t be a bit surprised if he did. Still, he’s about earned the
right to. Lived on the edges of nowhere in at least three continents.
Been through every danger in all kinds of savage places. It’s no wonder
he thinks the rest of us are a lazy self-pampering lot. Hugh’s a dear,
though, generous as one of the twelve disciples; give you the shirt off
his back. Bianca—that’s his wife—is nice too.”

“And he’s coming up here to your dance?”

Irene asked why not.

“It seems rather curious, a man like that, going to a Negro dance.”

This, Irene told her, was the year 1927 in the city of New York, and
hundreds of white people of Hugh Wentworth’s type came to affairs in
Harlem, more all the time. So many that Brian had said: “Pretty soon the
coloured people won’t be allowed in at all, or will have to sit in Jim
Crowed sections.”

“What do they come for?”

“Same reason you’re here, to see Negroes.”

“But why?”

“Various motives,” Irene explained. “A few purely and frankly to enjoy
themselves. Others to get material to turn into shekels. More, to gaze
on these great and near great while they gaze on the Negroes.”

Clare clapped her hands. ” ’Rene, suppose I come too! It sounds terribly
interesting and amusing. And I don’t see why I shouldn’t.”

Irene, who was regarding her through narrowed eyelids, had the same
thought that she had had two years ago on the roof of the Drayton, that
Clare Kendry was just a shade too good-looking. Her tone was on the edge
of irony as she said: “You mean because so many other white people go?”

A pale rose-colour came into Clare’s ivory cheeks. She lifted a hand in
protest. “Don’t be silly! Certainly not! I mean that in a crowd of that
kind I shouldn’t be noticed.”

On the contrary, was Irene’s opinion. It might be even doubly dangerous.
Some friend or acquaintance of John Bellew or herself might see and
recognize her.

At that, Clare laughed for a long time, little musical trills following
one another in sequence after sequence. It was as if the thought of any
friend of John Bellew’s going to a Negro dance was to her the most
amusing thing in the world.

“I don’t think,” she said, when she had done laughing, “we need worry
about that.”

Irene, however, wasn’t so sure. But all her efforts to dissuade Clare
were useless. To her, “You never can tell whom you’re likely to meet
there,” Clare’s rejoinder was: “I’ll take my chance on getting by.”

“Besides, you won’t know a soul and I shall be too busy to look after
you. You’ll be bored stiff.”

“I won’t, I won’t. If nobody asks me to dance, not even Dr. Redfield,
I’ll just sit and gaze on the great and the near great, too. Do, ’Rene,
be polite and invite me.”

Irene turned away from the caress of Clare’s smile, saying promptly and
positively: “I will not.”

“I mean to go anyway,” Clare retorted, and her voice was no less
positive than Irene’s.

“Oh, no. You couldn’t possibly go there alone. It’s a public thing. All
sorts of people go, anybody who can pay a dollar, even ladies of easy
virtue looking for trade. If you were to go there alone, you might be
mistaken for one of them, and that wouldn’t be too pleasant.”

Clare laughed again. “Thanks. I never have been. It might be amusing.
I’m warning you, ’Rene, that if you’re not going to be nice and take me,
I’ll still be among those present. I suppose, my dollar’s as good as
anyone’s.”

“Oh, the dollar! Don’t be a fool, Claire. I don’t care where you go, or
what you do. All I’m concerned with is the unpleasantness and possible
danger which your going might incur, because of your situation. To put
it frankly, I shouldn’t like to be mixed up in any row of the kind.” She
had risen again as she spoke and was standing at the window lifting and
spreading the small yellow chrysanthemums in the grey stone jar on the
sill. Her hands shook slightly, for she was in a near rage of impatience
and exasperation.

Claire’s face looked strange, as if she wanted to cry again. One of her
satin-covered feet swung restlessly back and forth. She said vehemently,
violently almost: “Damn Jack! He keeps me out of everything. Everything
I want. I could kill him! I expect I shall, some day.”

“I wouldn’t,” Irene advised her, “you see, there’s still capital
punishment, in this state at least. And really, Clare, after
everything’s said, I can’t see that you’ve a right to put all the blame
on him. You’ve got to admit that there’s his side to the thing. You
didn’t tell him you were coloured, so he’s got no way of knowing about
this hankering of yours after Negroes, or that it galls you to fury to
hear them called niggers and black devils. As far as I can see, you’ll
just have to endure some things and give up others. As we’ve said
before, everything must be paid for. Do, please, be reasonable.”

But Clare, it was plain, had shut away reason as well as caution. She
shook her head. “I can’t, I can’t,” she said. “I would if I could, but I
can’t. You don’t know, you can’t realize how I want to see Negroes, to
be with them again, to talk with them, to hear them laugh.”

And in the look she gave Irene, there was something groping, and
hopeless, and yet so absolutely determined that it was like an image of
the futile searching and the firm resolution in Irene’s own soul, and
increased the feeling of doubt and compunction that had been growing
within her about Clare Kendry.

She gave in.

“Oh, come if you want to. I s’pose you’re right. Once can’t do such a
terrible lot of harm.”

Pushing aside Clare’s extravagant thanks, for immediately she was sorry
that she had consented, she said briskly: “Should you like to come up
and see my boys?”

“I’d love to.”

They went up, Irene thinking that Brian would consider that she’d
behaved like a spineless fool. And he would be right. She certainly had.

Clare was smiling. She stood in the doorway of the boys’ playroom, her
shadowy eyes looking down on Junior and Ted, who had sprung apart from
their tusselling. Junior’s face had a funny little look of resentment.
Ted’s was blank.

Clare said: “Please don’t be cross. Of course, I know I’ve gone and
spoiled everything. But maybe, if I promise not to get too much in the
way, you’ll let me come in, just the same.”

“Sure, come in if you want to,” Ted told her. “We can’t stop you, you
know.” He smiled and made her a little bow and then turned away to a
shelf that held his favourite books. Taking one down, he settled himself
in a chair and began to read.

Junior said nothing, did nothing, merely stood there waiting.

“Get up, Ted! That’s rude. This is Theodore, Mrs. Bellew. Please excuse
his bad manners. He does know better. And this is Brian junior.
Mrs. Bellew is an old friend of mother’s. We used to play together when
we were little girls.”

Clare had gone and Brian had telephoned that he’d been detained and
would have his dinner downtown. Irene was a little glad for that. She
was going out later herself, and that meant she wouldn’t, probably, see
Brian until morning and so could put off for a few more hours speaking
of Clare and the N. W. L. dance.

She was angry with herself and with Clare. But more with herself, for
having permitted Clare to tease her into doing something that Brian had,
all but expressly, asked her not to do. She didn’t want him ruffled, not
just then, not while he was possessed of that unreasonable restless
feeling.

She was annoyed, too, because she was aware that she had consented to
something which, if it went beyond the dance, would involve her in
numerous petty inconveniences and evasions. And not only at home with
Brian, but outside with friends and acquaintances. The disagreeable
possibilities in connection with Clare Kendry’s coming among them loomed
before her in endless irritating array.

Clare, it seemed, still retained her ability to secure the thing that
she wanted in the face of any opposition, and in utter disregard of the
convenience and desire of others. About her there was some quality, hard
and persistent, with the strength and endurance of rock, that would not
be beaten or ignored. She couldn’t, Irene thought, have had an entirely
serene life. Not with that dark secret for ever crouching in the
background of her consciousness. And yet she hadn’t the air of a woman
whose life had been touched by uncertainty or suffering. Pain, fear, and
grief were things that left their mark on people. Even love, that
exquisite torturing emotion, left its subtle traces on the countenance.

But Clare—she had remained almost what she had always been, an
attractive, somewhat lonely child— selfish, wilful, and disturbing.

Three

The things which Irene Redfield remembered afterward about the Negro
Welfare League dance seemed, to her, unimportant and unrelated.

She remembered the not quite derisive smile with which Brian had cloaked
his vexation when she informed him—oh, so apologetically—that she had
promised to take Clare, and related the conversation of her visit.

She remembered her own little choked exclamation of admiration, when, on
coming downstairs a few minutes later than she had intended, she had
rushed into the living-room where Brian was waiting and had found Clare
there too. Clare, exquisite, golden, fragrant, flaunting, in a stately
gown of shining black taffeta, whose long, full skirt lay in graceful
folds about her slim golden feet; her glistening hair drawn smoothly
back into a small twist at the nape of her neck; her eyes sparkling like
dark jewels. Irene, with her new rose-colored chiffon frock ending at
the knees, and her cropped curls, felt dowdy and commonplace. She
regretted that she hadn’t counselled Clare to wear something ordinary
and inconspicuous. What on earth would Brian think of deliberate
courting of attention? But if Clare Kendry’s appearance had in it
anything that was, to Brian Redfield, annoying or displeasing, the fact
was not discernible to his wife as, with an uneasy feeling of guilt, she
stood there looking into his face while Clare explained that she and he
had made their own introductions, accompanying her words with a little
deferential smile for Brian, and receiving in return one of his amused,
slightly mocking smiles.

She remembered Clare’s saying, as they sped northward: “You know, I feel
exactly as I used to on the Sunday we went to the Christmas-tree
celebration. I knew there was to be a surprise for me and couldn’t quite
guess what it was to be. I am so excited. You can’t possibly imagine!
It’s marvellous to be really on the way! I can hardly believe it!”

At her words and tone a chilly wave of scorn had crept through Irene.
All those superlatives! She said, taking care to speak indifferently:
“Well, maybe in some ways you will be surprised, more, probably, than
you anticipate.”

Brian, at the wheel, had thrown back: “And then again, she won’t be so
very surprised after all, for it’ll no doubt be about what she expects.
Like the Christmas-tree.”

She remembered rushing around here and there, consulting with this
person and that one, and now and then snatching a part of a dance with
some man whose dancing she particularly liked.

She remembered catching glimpses of Clare in the whirling crowd,
dancing, sometimes with a white man, more often with a Negro, frequently
with Brian. Irene was glad that he was being nice to Clare, and glad
that Clare was having the opportunity to discover that some coloured men
were superior to some white men.

She remembered a conversation she had with Hugh Wentworth in a free
half-hour when she had dropped into a chair in an emptied box and let
her gaze wander over the bright crowd below.

Young men, old men, white men, black men; youthful women, older women,
pink women, golden women; fat men, thin men, tall men, short men; stout
women, slim women, stately women, small women moved by. An old nursery
rhyme popped into her head. She turned to Wentworth, who had just taken
a seat beside her, and recited it:

“Rich man, poor man, Beggar man, thief, Doctor, lawyer, Indian chief.” 1

“Yes,” Wentworth said, “that’s it. Everybody seems to be here and a few
more. But what I’m trying to find out is the name, status, and race of
the blonde beauty out of the fairy-tale. She’s dancing with Ralph
Hazelton at the moment. Nice study in contrasts, that.”

It was. Clare fair and golden, like a sunlit day. Hazelton dark, with
gleaming eyes, like a moonlit night.

“She’s a girl I used to know a long time ago in Chicago. And she wanted
especially to meet you.”

” ‘S awfully good of her, I’m sure. And now, alas! the usual thing’s
happened. All these others, these— er—’gentlemen of colour’ have driven
a mere Nordic from her mind.”

“Stuff !”

” ’S a fact, and what happens to all the ladies of my superior race
who’re lured up here. Look at Bianca. Have I laid eyes on her tonight
except in spots, here and there, being twirled about by some Ethiopian?
I have not.”

“But, Hugh, you’ve got to admit that the average coloured man is a
better dancer than the average white man—that is, if the celebrities and
‘butter and egg’ men who find their way up here are fair specimens of
white Terpsichorean art.”

“Not having tripped the light fantastic with any of the males, I’m not
in a position to argue the point. But I don’t think it’s merely that. ’S
something else, some other attraction. They’re always raving about the
good looks of some Negro, preferably an unusually dark one. Take
Hazelton there, for example. Dozens of women have declared him to be
fascinatingly handsome. How about you, Irene? Do you think
he’s—er—ravishingly beautiful?”

“I do not! And I don’t think the others do either. Not honestly, I mean.
I think that what they feel is— well, a kind of emotional excitement.
You know, the sort of thing you feel in the presence of something
strange, and even, perhaps, a bit repugnant to you; something so
different that it’s really at the opposite end of the pole from all your
accustomed notions of beauty.”

“Damned if I don’t think you’re halfway right!”

“I’m sure I am. Completely. (Except, of course, when it’s just
patronizing kindness on their part.) And I know coloured girls who’ve
experienced the same thing—the other way round, naturally.”

“And the men? You don’t subscribe to the general opinion about their
reason for coming up here. Purely predatory. Or, do you?”

“N-no. More curious, I should say.”

Wentworth, whose eyes were a clouded amber colour, had given her a long,
searching look that was really a stare. He said: “All this is awfully
interestin’, Irene. We’ve got to have a long talk about it some time
soon. There’s your friend from Chicago, first time up here and all that.
A case in point.”

Irene’s smile had only just lifted the corners of her painted lips. A
match blazed in Wentworth’s broad hands as he lighted her cigarette and
his own, and flickered out before he asked: “Or isn’t she?”

Her smile changed to a laugh. “Oh, Hugh! You’re so clever. You usually
know everything. Even how to tell the sheep from the goats. What do you
think? Is she?”

He blew a long contemplative wreath of smoke. “Damned if I know! I’ll be
as sure as anything that I’ve learned the trick. And then in the next
minute I’ll find I couldn’t pick some of ’em if my life depended on it.”

“Well, don’t let that worry you. Nobody can. Not by looking.”

“Not by looking, eh? Meaning?”

“I’m afraid I can’t explain. Not clearly. There are ways. But they’re
not definite or tangible.”

“Feeling of kinship, or something like that?”

“Good heavens, no! Nobody has that, except for their in-laws.”

“Right again! But go on about the sheep and the goats.”

“Well, take my own experience with Dorothy Thompkins. I’d met her four
or five times, in groups and crowds of people, before I knew she wasn’t
a Negro. One day I went to an awful tea, terribly dicty. Dorothy was
there. We got talking. In less than five minutes, I knew she was ‘fay.’
Not from anything she did or said or anything in her appearance.
Just—just something. A thing that couldn’t be registered.”

“Yes, I understand what you mean. Yet lots of people ‘pass’ all the
time.”

“Not on our side, Hugh. It’s easy for a Negro to ‘pass’ for white. But I
don’t think it would be so simple for a white person to ‘pass’ for
coloured.”

“Never thought of that.”

“No, you wouldn’t. Why should you?”

He regarded her critically through mists of smoke. “Slippin’ me, Irene?”

She said soberly: “Not you, Hugh. I’m too fond of you. And you’re too
sincere.”

And she remembered that towards the end of the dance Brian had come to
her and said: “I’ll drop you first and then run Clare down.” And that he
had been doubtful of her discretion when she had explained to him that
he wouldn’t have to bother because she had asked Bianca Wentworth to
take her down with them. Did she, he had asked, think it had been wise
to tell them about Clare?

“I told them nothing,” she said sharply, for she was unbearably tired,
“except that she was at the Walsingham. It’s on their way. And, really,
I haven’t thought anything about the wisdom of it, but now that I do,
I’d say it’s much better for them to take her than you.”

“As you please. She’s your friend, you know,” he had answered, with a
disclaiming shrug of his shoulders.

Except for these few unconnected things the dance faded to a blurred
memory, its outlines mingling with those of other dances of its kind
that she had attended in the past and would attend in the future.

Four

But undistinctive as the dance had seemed, it was, nevertheless,
important. For it marked the beginning of a new factor in Irene
Redfield’s life, something that left its trace on all the future years
of her existence. It was the beginning of a new friendship with Clare
Kendry.

She came to them frequently after that. Always with a touching gladness
that welled up and overflowed on all the Redfield household. Yet Irene
could never be sure whether her comings were a joy or a vexation.

Certainly she was no trouble. She had not to be entertained, or even
noticed—if anyone could ever avoid noticing Clare. If Irene happened to
be out or occupied, Clare could very happily amuse herself with Ted and
Junior, who had conceived for her an admiration that verged on
adoration, especially Ted. Or, lacking the boys, she would descend to
the kitchen and, with—to Irene—an exasperating child-like lack of
perception, spend her visit in talk and merriment with Zulena and Sadie.

Irene, while secretly resenting these visits to the playroom and
kitchen, for some obscure reason which she shied away from putting into
words, never requested that Clare make an end of them, or hinted that
she wouldn’t have spoiled her own Margery so outrageously, nor been so
friendly with white servants.

Brian looked on these things with the same tolerant amusement that
marked his entire attitude toward Clare. Never since his faintly
derisive surprise at Irene’s information that she was to go with them
the night of the dance, had he shown any disapproval of Clare’s
presence. On the other hand, it couldn’t be said that her presence
seemed to please him. It didn’t annoy or disturb him, so far as Irene
could judge. That was all.

Didn’t he, she once asked him, think Clare was extraordinarily
beautiful?

“No,” he had answered. “That is, not particularly.”

“Brian, you’re fooling!”

“No, honestly. Maybe I’m fussy. I s’pose she’d be an unusually
good-looking white woman. I like my ladies darker. Beside an
A-number-one sheba, she simply hasn’t got ’em.”

Clare went, sometimes with Irene and Brian, to parties and dances, and
on a few occasions when Irene hadn’t been able or inclined to go out,
she had gone alone with Brian to some bridge party or benefit dance.

Once in a while she came formally to dine with them. She wasn’t,
however, in spite of her poise and air of worldliness, the ideal
dinner-party guest. Beyond the æsthetic pleasure one got from watching
her, she contributed little, sitting for the most part silent, an odd
dreaming look in her hypnotic eyes. Though she could for some purpose of
her own—the desire to be included in some party being made up to go
cabareting, or an invitation to a dance or a tea—talk fluently and
entertainingly.

She was generally liked. She was so friendly and responsive, and so
ready to press the sweet food of flattery on all. Nor did she object to
appearing a bit pathetic and ill-used, so that people could feel sorry
for her. And, no matter how often she came among them, she still
remained someone apart, a little mysterious and strange, someone to
wonder about and to admire and to pity.

Her visits were undecided and uncertain, being, as they were, dependent
on the presence or absence of John Bellew in the city. But she did, once
in a while, manage to steal uptown for an afternoon even when he was not
away. As time went on without any apparent danger of discovery, even
Irene ceased to be perturbed about the possibility of Clare’s husband’s
stumbling on her racial identity.

The daughter, Margery, had been left in Switzerland in school, for Clare
and Bellew would be going back in the early spring. In March, Clare
thought. “And how I do hate to think of it!” she would say, always with
a suggestion of leashed rebellion; “but I can’t see how I’m going to get
out of it. Jack won’t hear of my staying behind. If I could have just a
couple of months more in New York, alone I mean, I’d be the happiest
thing in the world.”

“I imagine you’ll be happy enough, once you get away,” Irene told her
one day when she was bewailing her approaching departure. “Remember,
there’s Margery. Think how glad you’ll be to see her after all this
time.”

“Children aren’t everything,” was Clare Kendry’s answer to that. “There
are other things in the world, though I admit some people don’t seem to
suspect it.” And she laughed, more, it seemed, at some secret joke of
her own than at her words.

Irene replied: “You know you don’t mean that, Clare. You’re only trying
to tease me. I know very well that I take being a mother rather
seriously. I am wrapped up in my boys and the running of my house. I
can’t help it. And, really, I don’t think it’s anything to laugh at.”
And though she was aware of the slight primness in her words and
attitude, she had neither power nor wish to efface it.

Clare, suddenly very sober and sweet, said: “You’re right. It’s no
laughing matter. It’s shameful of me to tease you, ’Rene. You are so
good.” And she reached out and gave Irene’s hand an affectionate little
squeeze. “Don’t think,” she added, “whatever happens, that I’ll ever
forget how good you’ve been to me.”

“Nonsense!”

“Oh, but you have, you have. It’s just that I haven’t any proper morals
or sense of duty, as you have, that makes me act as I do.”

“Now you are talking nonsense.”

“But it’s true, ’Rene. Can’t you realize that I’m not like you a bit?
Why, to get the things I want badly enough, I’d do anything, hurt
anybody, throw anything away. Really, ’Rene, I’m not safe.” Her voice as
well as the look on her face had a beseeching earnestness that made
Irene vaguely uncomfortable.

She said: “I don’t believe it. In the first place what you’re saying is
so utterly, so wickedly wrong. And as for your giving up things——” She
stopped, at a loss for an acceptable term to express her opinion of
Clare’s “having” nature.

But Clare Kendry had begun to cry, audibly, with no effort at restraint,
and for no reason that Irene could discover.

Part Three: Finale

One

The year was getting on towards its end. October, November had gone.
December had come and brought with it a little snow and then a freeze
and after that a thaw and some soft pleasant days that had in them a
feeling of spring.

It wasn’t, this mild weather, a bit Christmasy, Irene Redfield was
thinking, as she turned out of Seventh Avenue into her own street. She
didn’t like it to be warm and springy when it should have been cold and
crisp, or grey and cloudy as if snow was about to fall. The weather,
like people, ought to enter into the spirit of the season. Here the
holidays were almost upon them, and the streets through which she had
come were streaked with rills of muddy water and the sun shone so warmly
that children had taken off their hats and scarfs. It was all as soft,
as like April, as possible. The kind of weather for Easter. Certainly
not for Christmas.

Though, she admitted, reluctantly, she herself didn’t feel the proper
Christmas spirit this year, either. But that couldn’t be helped, it
seemed, any more than the weather. She was weary and depressed. And for
all her trying, she couldn’t be free of that dull, indefinite misery
which with increasing tenaciousness had laid hold of her. The morning’s
aimless wandering through the teeming Harlem streets, long after she had
ordered the flowers which had been her excuse for setting out, was but
another effort to tear herself loose from it.

She went up the cream stone steps, into the house, and down to the
kitchen. There were to be people in to tea. But that, she found, after a
few words with Sadie and Zulena, need give her no concern. She was
thankful. She didn’t want to be bothered. She went upstairs and took off
her things and got into bed.

She thought: “Bother those people coming to tea!”

She thought: “If I could only be sure that at bottom it’s just Brazil.”

She thought: “Whatever it is, if I only knew what it was, I could manage
it.”

Brian again. Unhappy, restless, withdrawn. And she, who had prided
herself on knowing his moods, their causes and their remedies, had found
it first unthinkable, and then intolerable, that this, so like and yet
so unlike those other spasmodic restlessnesses of his, should be to her
incomprehensible and elusive.

He was restless and he was not restless. He was discontented, yet there
were times when she felt he was possessed of some intense secret
satisfaction, like a cat who had stolen the cream. He was irritable with
the boys, especially Junior, for Ted, who seemed to have an uncanny
knowledge of his father’s periods of off moods, kept out of his way when
possible. They got on his nerves, drove him to violent outbursts of
temper, very different from his usual gently sarcastic remarks that
constituted his idea of discipline for them. On the other hand, with her
he was more than customarily considerate and abstemious. And it had been
weeks since she had felt the keen edge of his irony.

He was like a man marking time, waiting. But what was he waiting for? It
was extraordinary that, after all these years of accurate perception,
she now lacked the talent to discover what that appearance of waiting
meant. It was the knowledge that, for all her watching, all her patient
study, the reason for his humour still eluded her which filled her with
foreboding dread. That guarded reserve of his seemed to her unjust,
inconsiderate, and alarming. It was as if he had stepped out beyond her
reach into some section, strange and walled, where she could not get at
him.

She closed her eyes, thinking what a blessing it would be if she could
get a little sleep before the boys came in from school. She couldn’t, of
course, though she was so tired, having had, of late, so many sleepless
nights. Nights filled with questionings and premonitions.

But she did sleep—several hours.

She wakened to find Brian standing at her bedside looking down at her,
an unfathomable expression in his eyes.

She said: “I must have dropped off to sleep,” and watched a slender
ghost of his old amused smile pass over his face.

“It’s getting on to four,” he told her, meaning, she knew, that she was
going to be late again.

She fought back the quick answer that rose to her lips and said instead:
“I’m getting right up. It was good of you to think to call me.” She sat
up.

He bowed. “Always the attentive husband, you see.”

“Yes indeed. Thank goodness, everything’s ready.”

“Except you. Oh, and Clare’s downstairs.”

“Clare! What a nuisance! I didn’t ask her. Purposely.”

“I see. Might a mere man ask why? Or is the reason so subtly feminine
that it wouldn’t be understood by him?”

A little of his smile had come back. Irene, who was beginning to shake
off some of her depression under his familiar banter, said, almost
gaily: “Not at all. It just happens that this party happens to be for
Hugh, and that Hugh happens not to care a great deal for Clare;
therefore I, who happen to be giving the party, didn’t happen to ask
her. Nothing could be simpler. Could it?”

“Nothing. It’s so simple that I can easily see beyond your simple
explanation and surmise that Clare, probably, just never happened to pay
Hugh the admiring attention that he happens to consider no more than his
just due. Simplest thing in the world.”

Irene exclaimed in amazement: “Why, I thought you liked Hugh! You don’t,
you can’t, believe anything so idiotic!”

“Well, Hugh does think he’s God, you know.”

“That,” Irene declared, getting out of bed, “is absolutely not true. He
thinks ever so much better of himself than that, as you, who know and
have read him, ought to be able to guess. If you remember what a low
opinion he has of God, you won’t make such a silly mistake.”

She went into the closet for her things and, coming back, hung her frock
over the back of a chair and placed her shoes on the floor beside it.
Then she sat down before her dressing-table.

Brian didn’t speak. He continued to stand beside the bed, seeming to
look at nothing in particular. Certainly not at her. True, his gaze was
on her, but in it there was some quality that made her feel that at that
moment she was no more to him than a pane of glass through which he
stared. At what? She didn’t know, couldn’t guess. And this made her
uncomfortable. Piqued her.

She said: “It just happens that Hugh prefers intelligent women.”

Plainly he was startled. “D’you mean that you think Clare is stupid?” he
asked, regarding her with lifted eyebrows, which emphasized the
disbelief of his voice.

She wiped the cold cream from her face, before she said: “No, I don’t.
She isn’t stupid. She’s intelligent enough in a purely feminine way.
Eighteenth-century France would have been a marvellous setting for her,
or the old South if she hadn’t made the mistake of being born a Negro.”

“I see. Intelligent enough to wear a tight bodice and keep bowing swains
whispering compliments and retrieving dropped fans. Rather a pretty
picture. I take it, though, as slightly feline in its implication.”

“Well, then, all I can say is that you take it wrongly. Nobody admires
Clare more than I do, for the kind of intelligence she has, as well as
for her decorative qualities. But she’s not—She isn’t— She hasn’t— Oh, I
can’t explain it. Take Bianca, for example, or, to keep to the race,
Felise Freeland. Looks and brains. Real brains that can hold their own
with anybody. Clare has got brains of a sort, the kind that are useful
too. Acquisitive, you know. But she’d bore a man like Hugh to suicide.
Still, I never thought that even Clare would come to a private party to
which she hadn’t been asked. But, it’s like her.”

For a minute there was silence. She completed the bright red arch of her
full lips. Brian moved towards the door. His hand was on the knob. He
said: “I’m sorry, Irene. It’s my fault entirely. She seemed so hurt at
being left out that I told her I was sure you’d forgotten and to just
come along.”

Irene cried out: “But, Brian, I——” and stopped, amazed at the fierce
anger that had blazed up in her.

Brian’s head came round with a jerk. His brows lifted in an odd
surprise.

Her voice, she realized, had gone queer. But she had an instinctive
feeling that it hadn’t been the whole cause of his attitude. And that
little straightening motion of the shoulders. Hadn’t it been like that
of a man drawing himself up to receive a blow? Her fright was like a
scarlet spear of terror leaping at her heart.

Clare Kendry! So that was it! Impossible. It couldn’t be.

In the mirror before her she saw that he was still regarding her with
that air of slight amazement. She dropped her eyes to the jars and
bottles on the table and began to fumble among them with hands whose
fingers shook slightly.

“Of course,” she said carefully, “I’m glad you did. And in spite of my
recent remarks, Clare does add to any party. She’s so easy on the eyes.”

When she looked again, the surprise had gone from his face and the
expectancy from his bearing.

“Yes,” he agreed. “Well, I guess I’ll run along. One of us ought to be
down, I s’pose.”

“You’re right. One of us ought to.” She was surprised that it was in her
normal tones she spoke, caught as she was by the heart since that dull
indefinite fear had grown suddenly into sharp panic. “I’ll be down
before you know it,” she promised.

“All right.” But he still lingered. “You’re quite certain. You don’t
mind my asking her? Not awfully, I mean? I see now that I ought to have
spoken to you. Trust women to have their reasons for everything.”

She made a little pretence at looking at him, managed a tiny smile, and
turned away. Clare! How sickening!

“Yes, don’t they?” she said, striving to keep her voice casual. Within
her she felt a hardness from feeling, not absent, but repressed. And
that hardness was rising, swelling. Why didn’t he go? Why didn’t he?

He had opened the door at last. “You won’t be long?” he asked,
admonished.

She shook her head, unable to speak, for there was a choking in her
throat, and the confusion in her mind was like the beating of wings.
Behind her she heard the gentle impact of the door as it closed behind
him, and knew that he had gone. Down to Clare.

For a long minute she sat in strained stiffness. The face in the mirror
vanished from her sight, blotted out by this thing which had so suddenly
flashed across her groping mind. Impossible for her to put it
immediately into words or give it outline, for, prompted by some impulse
of self-protection, she recoiled from exact expression.

She closed her unseeing eyes and clenched her fists. She tried not to
cry. But her lips tightened and no effort could check the hot tears of
rage and shame that sprang into her eyes and flowed down her cheeks; so
she laid her face in her arms and wept silently.

When she was sure that she had done crying, she wiped away the warm
remaining tears and got up. After bathing her swollen face in cold,
refreshing water and carefully applying a stinging splash of toilet
water, she went back to the mirror and regarded herself gravely.
Satisfied that there lingered no betraying evidence of weeping, she
dusted a little powder on her dark-white face and again examined it
carefully, and with a kind of ridiculing contempt.

“I do think,” she confided to it, “that you’ve been something—oh, very
much—of a damned fool.”

Downstairs the ritual of tea gave her some busy moments, and that, she
decided, was a blessing. She wanted no empty spaces of time in which her
mind would immediately return to that horror which she had not yet
gathered sufficient courage to face. Pouring tea properly and nicely was
an occupation that required a kind of well-balanced attention.

In the room beyond, a clock chimed. A single sound. Fifteen minutes past
five o’clock. That was all! And yet in the short space of half an hour
all of life had changed, lost its colour, its vividness, its whole
meaning. No, she reflected, it wasn’t that that had happened. Life about
her, apparently, went on exactly as before.

“Oh, Mrs. Runyon.So nice to see you.Two?Really?How exciting\!Yes, I
think Tuesday’s all right.”

Yes, life went on precisely as before. It was only she that had changed.
Knowing, stumbling on this thing, had changed her. It was as if in a
house long dim, a match had been struck, showing ghastly shapes where
had been only blurred shadows.

Chatter, chatter, chatter. Someone asked her a question. She glanced up
with what she felt was a rigid smile.

“YesBrian picked it up last winter in Haiti. Terribly weird, isn’t it?It
is rather marvellous in its own hideous way.Practically nothing, I
believe. A few cents.”

Hideous. A great weariness came over her. Even the small exertion of
pouring golden tea into thin old cups seemed almost too much for her.
She went on pouring. Made repetitions of her smile. Answered questions.
Manufactured conversation. She thought: “I feel like the oldest person
in the world with the longest stretch of life before me.”

“Josephine Baker?No. I’ve never seen her.Well, she might have been in
Shuffle Along 2 when I saw it, but if she was, I don’t remember her.Oh,
but you’re wrong\!I do think Ethel Waters is awfully good.”

There were the familiar little tinkling sounds of spoons striking
against frail cups, the soft running sounds of inconsequential talk,
punctuated now and then with laughter. In irregular small groups,
disintegrating, coalescing, striking just the right note of disharmony,
disorder in the big room, which Irene had furnished with a sparingness
that was almost chaste, moved the guests with that slight familiarity
that makes a party a success. On the floor and the walls the sinking sun
threw long, fantastic shadows.

So like many other tea-parties she had had. So unlike any of those
others. But she mustn’t think yet. Time enough for that after. All the
time in the world. She had a second’s flashing knowledge of what those
words might portend. Time with Brian. Time without him. It was gone,
leaving in its place an almost uncontrollable impulse to laugh, to
scream, to hurl things about. She wanted, suddenly, to shock people, to
hurt them, to make them notice her, to be aware of her suffering.

“Hello, Dave.Felise.Really your clothes are the despair of half the
women in Harlem.How do you do it?Lovely, is it Worth or Lanvin?Oh, a
mere Babani.…”

“Merely that,” Felise Freeland acknowledged. “Come out of it, Irene,
whatever it is. You look like the second gravedigger.”

“Thanks, for the hint, Felise. I’m not feeling quite up to par. The
weather, I guess.”

“Buy yourself an expensive new frock, child. It always helps. Any time
this child gets the blues, it means money out of Dave’s pocket. How’re
those boys of yours?”

The boys! For once she’d forgotten them.

They were, she told Felise, very well. Felise mumbled something about
that being awfully nice, and said she’d have to fly, because for a
wonder she saw Mrs. Bellew sitting by herself, “and I’ve been trying to
get her alone all afternoon. I want her for a party. Isn’t she stunning
today?”

Clare was. Irene couldn’t remember ever having seen her look better. She
was wearing a superlatively simple cinnamon-brown frock which brought
out all her vivid beauty, and a little golden bowl of a hat. Around her
neck hung a string of amber beads that would easily have made six or
eight like one Irene owned. Yes, she was stunning.

The ripple of talk flowed on. The fire roared. The shadows stretched
longer.

Across the room was Hugh. He wasn’t, Irene hoped, being too bored. He
seemed as he always did, a bit aloof, a little amused, and somewhat
weary. And as usual he was hovering before the book-shelves. But he was
not, she noticed, looking at the book he had taken down. Instead, his
dull amber eyes were held by something across the room. They were a
little scornful. Well, Hugh had never cared for Clare Kendry. For a
minute Irene hesitated, then turned her head, though she knew what it
was that held Hugh’s gaze. Clare, who had suddenly clouded all her days.
Brian, the father of Ted and Junior.

Clare’s ivory face was what it always was, beautiful and caressing. Or
maybe today a little masked. Unrevealing. Unaltered and undisturbed by
any emotion within or without. Brian’s seemed to Irene to be pitiably
bare. Or was it too as it always was? That half-effaced seeking look,
did he always have that? Queer, that now she didn’t know, couldn’t
recall. Then she saw him smile, and the smile made his face all eager
and shining. Impelled by some inner urge of loyalty to herself, she
glanced away. But only for a moment. And when she turned towards them
again, she thought that the look on his face was the most melancholy and
yet the most scoffing that she had ever seen upon it.

In the next quarter of an hour she promised herself to Bianca Wentworth
in Sixty-second Street, Jane Tenant at Seventh Avenue and a Hundred and
Fiftieth Street, and the Dashields in Brooklyn for dinner all on the
same evening and at almost the same hour.

Oh well, what did it matter? She had no thoughts at all now, and all she
felt was a great fatigue. Before her tired eyes Clare Kendry was talking
to Dave Freeland. Scraps of their conversation, in Clare’s husky voice,
floated over to her: “always admired youso much about you long
agoeverybody says sono one but you.” And more of the same. The man hung
rapt on her words, though he was the husband of Felise Freeland, and the
author of novels that revealed a man of perception and a devastating
irony. And he fell for such pish-posh! And all because Clare had a trick
of sliding down ivory lids over astonishing black eyes and then lifting
them suddenly and turning on a caressing smile. Men like Dave Freeland
fell for it. And Brian.

Her mental and physical languor receded. Brian. What did it mean? How
would it affect her and the boys? The boys! She had a surge of relief.
It ebbed, vanished. A feeling of absolute unimportance followed.
Actually, she didn’t count. She was, to him, only the mother of his
sons. That was all. Alone she was nothing. Worse. An obstacle.

Rage boiled up in her.

There was a slight crash. On the floor at her feet lay the shattered
cup. Dark stains dotted the bright rug. Spread. The chatter stopped.
Went on. Before her, Zulena gathered up the white fragments.

As from a distance Hugh Wentworth’s clipt voice came to her, though he
was, she was aware, somehow miraculously at her side. “Sorry,” he
apologized. “Must have pushed you. Clumsy of me. Don’t tell me it’s
priceless and irreplaceable.”

It hurt. Dear God! How the thing hurt! But she couldn’t think of that
now. Not with High sitting there mumbling apologies and lies. The
significance of his words, the power of his discernment, stirred in her
a sense of caution. Her pride revolted. Damn Hugh! Something would have
to be done about him. Now. She couldn’t, it seemed, help his knowing. It
was too late for that. But she could and would keep him from knowing
that she knew. She could, she would bear it. She’d have to. There were
the boys. Her whole body went taut. In that second she saw that she
could bear anything, but only if no one knew that she had anything to
bear. It hurt. It frightened her, but she could bear it.

She turned to Hugh. Shook her head. Raised innocent dark eyes to his
concerned pale ones. “Oh, no,” she protested, “you didn’t push me. Cross
your heart, hope to die, and I’ll tell you how it happened.”

“Done!”

“Did you notice that cup? Well, you’re lucky. It was the ugliest thing
that your ancestors, the charming Confederates ever owned. I’ve
forgotten how many thousands of years ago it was that Brian’s
great-great-grand-uncle owned it. But it has, or had, a good old hoary
history. It was brought North by way of the subway. Oh, all right! Be
English if you want to and call it the underground. What I’m coming to
is the fact that I’ve never figured out a way of getting rid of it until
about five minutes ago. I had an inspiration. I had only to break it,
and I was rid of it for ever. So simple! And I’d never thought of it
before.”

Hugh nodded and his frosty smile spread over his features. Had she
convinced him?

“Still,” she went on with a little laugh that didn’t, she was sure,
sound the least bit forced, “I’m perfectly willing for you to take the
blame and admit that you pushed me at the wrong moment. What are friends
for, if not to help bear our sins? Brian will certainly be told that it
was your fault.

“More tea, Clare?I haven’t had a minute with you.Yes, it is a nice
party.You’ll stay to dinner, I hope.Oh, too bad\!I’ll be alone with the
boys.They’ll be sorry. Brian’s got a medical meeting, or something.…
Nice frock you’re wearing.… Thanks.… Well, good-bye; see you soon, I
hope.”

The clock chimed. One. Two. Three. Four. Five. Six. Was it, could it be,
only a little over an hour since she had come down to tea? One little
hour.

“Must you go?Good-bye.Thank you so much.So nice to see you.Yes,
Wednesday.My love to Madge.Sorry, but I’m filled up for Tuesday.Oh,
really?Yes.Good-bye.Good-bye.”

It hurt. It hurt like hell. But it didn’t matter, if no one knew. If
everything could go on as before. If the boys were safe.

It did hurt.

But it didn’t matter.

Two

But it did matter. It mattered more than anything had ever mattered
before.

What bitterness! That the one fear, the one uncertainty, that she had
felt, Brian’s ache to go somewhere else, should have dwindled to a
childish triviality! And with it the quality of the courage and
resolution with which she had met it. From the visions and dangers which
she now perceived she shrank away. For them she had no remedy or
courage. Desperately she tried to shut out the knowledge from which had
risen this turmoil, which she had no power to moderate or still, within
her. And half succeeded.

For, she reasoned, what was there, what had there been, to show that she
was even half correct in her tormenting notion? Nothing. She had seen
nothing, heard nothing. She had no facts or proofs. She was only making
herself unutterably wretched by an unfounded suspicion. It had been a
case of looking for trouble and finding it in good measure. Merely that.

With this self-assurance that she had no real knowledge, she redoubled
her efforts to drive out of her mind the distressing thought of faiths
broken and trusts betrayed which every mental vision of Clare, of Brian,
brought with them. She could not, she would not, go again through the
tearing agony that lay just behind her.

She must, she told herself, be fair. In all their married life she had
had no slightest cause to suspect her husband of any infidelity, of any
serious flirtation even. If—and she doubted it—he had had his hours of
outside erratic conduct, they were unknown to her. Why begin now to
assume them? And on nothing more concrete than an idea that had leapt
into her mind because he had told her that he had invited a friend, a
friend of hers, to a party in his own house. And at a time when she had
been, it was likely, more asleep than awake. How could she without
anything done or said, or left undone or unsaid, so easily believe him
guilty? How be so ready to renounce all confidence in the worth of their
life together?

And if, perchance, there were some small something—well, what could it
mean? Nothing. There were the boys. There was John Bellew. The thought
of these three gave her some slight relief. But she did not look the
future in the face. She wanted to feel nothing, to think nothing; simply
to believe that it was all silly invention on her part. Yet she could
not. Not quite.

Christmas, with its unreality, its hectic rush, its false gaiety, came
and went. Irene was thankful for the confused unrest of the season. Its
irksomeness, its crowds, its inane and insincere repetitions of
genialities, pushed between her and the contemplation of her growing
unhappiness.

She was thankful, too, for the continued absence of Clare, who, John
Bellew having returned from a long stay in Canada, had withdrawn to that
other life of hers, remote and inaccessible. But beating against the
walled prison of Irene’s thoughts was the shunned fancy that, though
absent, Clare Kendry was still present, that she was close.

Brian, too, had withdrawn. The house contained his outward self and his
belongings. He came and went with his usual noiseless irregularity. He
sat across from her at table. He slept in his room next to hers at
night. But he was remote and inaccessible. No use pretending that he was
happy, that things were the same as they had always been. He wasn’t and
they weren’t. However, she assured herself, it needn’t necessarily be
because of anything that involved Clare. It was, it must be, another
manifestation of the old longing.

But she did wish it were spring, March, so that Clare would be sailing,
out of her life and Brian’s. Though she had come almost to believe that
there was nothing but generous friendship between those two, she was
very tired of Clare Kendry. She wanted to be free of her, and of her
furtive comings and goings. If something would only happen, something
that would make John Bellew decide on an earlier departure, or that
would remove Clare. Anything. She didn’t care what. Not even if it were
that Clare’s Margery were ill, or dying. Not even if Bellew should
discover——

She drew a quick, sharp breath. And for a long time sat staring down at
the hands in her lap. Strange, she had not before realized how easily
she could put Clare out of her life! She had only to tell John Bellew
that his wife—No. Not that! But if he should somehow learn of these
Harlem visits— Why should she hesitate? Why spare Clare?

But she shrank away from the idea of telling that man, Clare Kendry’s
white husband, anything that would lead him to suspect that his wife was
a Negro. Nor could she write it, or telephone it, or tell it to someone
else who would tell him.

She was caught between two allegiances, different, yet the same.
Herself. Her race. Race! The thing that bound and suffocated her.
Whatever steps she took, or if she took none at all, something would be
crushed. A person or the race. Clare, herself, or the race. Or, it might
be, all three. Nothing, she imagined, was ever more completely sardonic.

Sitting alone in the quiet living-room in the pleasant firelight, Irene
Redfield wished, for the first time in her life, that she had not been
born a Negro. For the first time she suffered and rebelled because she
was unable to disregard the burden of race. It was, she cried silently,
enough to suffer as a woman, an individual, on one’s own account,
without having to suffer for the race as well. It was a brutality, and
undeserved. Surely, no other people so cursed as Ham’s dark children.

Nevertheless, her weakness, her shrinking, her own inability to compass
the thing, did not prevent her from wishing fervently that, in some way
with which she had no concern, John Bellew would discover, not that his
wife had a touch of the tar-brush— Irene didn’t want that—but that she
was spending all the time that he was out of the city in black Harlem.
Only that. It would be enough to rid her forever of Clare Kendry.

Three

As if in answer to her wish, the very next day Irene came face to face
with Bellew.

She had gone downtown with Felise Freeland to shop. The day was an
exceptionally cold one, with a strong wind that had whipped a dusky red
into Felise’s smooth golden cheeks and driven moisture into Irene’s soft
brown eyes.

Clinging to each other, with heads bent against the wind, they turned
out of the Avenue into Fifty-seventh Street. A sudden bluster flung them
around the corner with unexpected quickness and they collided with a
man.

“Pardon,” Irene begged laughingly, and looked up into the face of Clare
Kendry’s husband.

“Mrs. Redfield!”

His hat came off. He held out his hand, smiling genially.

But the smile faded at once. Surprise, incredulity, and—was it
understanding?—passed over his features.

He had, Irene knew, become conscious of Felise, golden, with curly black
Negro hair, whose arm was still linked in her own. She was sure, now, of
the understanding in his face, as he looked at her again and then back
at Felise. And displeasure.

He didn’t, however, withdraw his outstretched hand. Not at once.

But Irene didn’t take it. Instinctively, in the first glance of
recognition, her face had become a mask. Now she turned on him a totally
uncomprehending look, a bit questioning. Seeing that he still stood with
hand outstretched, she gave him the cool appraising stare which she
reserved for mashers, and drew Felise on.

Felise drawled: “Aha! Been ‘passing,’ have you? Well, I’ve queered
that.”

“Yes, I’m afraid you have.”

“Why, Irene Redfield! You sound as if you cared terribly. I’m sorry.”

“I do, but not for the reason you think. I don’t believe I’ve ever gone
native in my life except for the sake of convenience, restaurants,
theatre tickets, and things like that. Never socially I mean, except
once. You’ve just passed the only person that I’ve ever met disguised as
a white woman.”

“Awfully sorry. Be sure your sin will find you out and all that. Tell me
about it.”

“I’d like to. It would amuse you. But I can’t.”

Felise’s laughter was as languidly nonchalant as her cool voice. “Can it
be possible that the honest Irene has— Oh, do look at that coat! There.
The red one. Isn’t it a dream?”

Irene was thinking: “I had my chance and didn’t take it. I had only to
speak and to introduce him to Felise with the casual remark that he was
Clare’s husband. Only that. Fool. Fool.” That instinctive loyalty to a
race. Why couldn’t she get free of it? Why should it include Clare?
Clare, who’d shown little enough consideration for her, and hers. What
she felt was not so much resentment as a dull despair because she could
not change herself in this respect, could not separate individuals from
the race, herself from Clare Kendry.

“Let’s go home, Felise. I’m so tired I could drop.”

“Why, we haven’t done half the things we planned.”

“I know, but it’s too cold to be running all over town. But you stay
down if you want to.”

“I think I’ll do that, if you don’t mind.”

And now another problem confronted Irene. She must tell Clare of this
meeting. Warn her. But how? She hadn’t seen her for days. Writing and
telephoning were equally unsafe. And even if it was possible to get in
touch with her, what good would it do? If Bellew hadn’t concluded that
he’d made a mistake, if he was certain of her identity—and he was
nobody’s fool— telling Clare wouldn’t avert the results of the
encounter. Besides, it was too late. Whatever was in store for Clare
Kendry had already overtaken her.

Irene was conscious of a feeling of relieved thankfulness at the thought
that she was probably rid of Clare, and without having lifted a finger
or uttered one word.

But she did mean to tell Brian about meeting John Bellew.

But that, it seemed, was impossible. Strange. Something held her back.
Each time she was on the verge of saying: “I ran into Clare’s husband on
the street downtown today. I’m sure he recognized me, and Felise was
with me,” she failed to speak. It sounded too much like the warning she
wanted it to be. Not even in the presence of the boys at dinner could
she make the bare statement.

The evening dragged. At last she said good-night and went upstairs, the
words unsaid.

She thought: “Why didn’t I tell him? Why didn’t I? If trouble comes from
this, I’ll never forgive myself. I’ll tell him when he comes up.”

She took up a book, but she could not read, so oppressed was she by a
nameless foreboding.

What if Bellew should divorce Clare? Could he? There was the Rhinelander
case. But in France, in Paris, such things were very easy. If he
divorced her—If Clare were free—But of all the things that could happen,
that was the one she did not want. She must get her mind away from that
possibility. She must.

Then came a thought which she tried to drive away. If Clare should die!
Then— Oh, it was vile! To think, yes, to wish that! She felt faint and
sick. But the thought stayed with her. She could not get rid of it.

She heard the outer door open. Close. Brian had gone out. She turned her
face into her pillow to cry. But no tears came.

She lay there awake, thinking of things past. Of her courtship and
marriage and Junior’s birth. Of the time they had bought the house in
which they had lived so long and so happily. Of the time Ted had passed
his pneumonia crisis and they knew he would live. And of other sweet
painful memories that would never come again.

Above everything else she had wanted, had striven, to keep undisturbed
the pleasant routine of her life. And now Clare Kendry had come into it,
and with her the menace of impermanence.

“Dear God,” she prayed, “make March come quickly.”

By and by she slept.

Four

The next morning brought with it a snowstorm that lasted throughout the
day.

After a breakfast, which had been eaten almost in silence and which she
was relieved to have done with, Irene Redfield lingered for a little
while in the downstairs hall, looking out at the soft flakes fluttering
down. She was watching them immediately fill some ugly irregular gaps
left by the feet of hurrying pedestrians when Zulena came to her,
saying: “The telephone, Mrs. Redfield. It’s Mrs. Bellew.”

“Take the message, Zulena, please.”

Though she continued to stare out of the window, Irene saw nothing now,
stabbed as she was by fear— and hope. Had anything happened between
Clare and Bellew? And if so, what? And was she to be freed at last from
the aching anxiety of the past weeks? Or was there to be more, and
worse? She had a wrestling moment, in which it seemed that she must rush
after Zulena and hear for herself what it was that Clare had to say. But
she waited.

Zulena, when she came back, said: “She says, ma’am, that she’ll be able
to go to Mrs. Freeland’s tonight. She’ll be here some time between eight
and nine.”

“Thank you, Zulena.”

The day dragged on to its end.

At dinner Brian spoke bitterly of a lynching that he had been reading
about in the evening paper.

“Dad, why is it that they only lynch coloured people?” Ted asked.

“Because they hate ’em, son.”

“Brian!” Irene’s voice was a plea and a rebuke.

Ted said: “Oh! And why do they hate ’em?”

“Because they are afraid of them.”

“But what makes them afraid of ’em?”

“Because—”

“Brian!”

“It seems, son, that is a subject we can’t go into at the moment without
distressing the ladies of our family,” he told the boy with mock
seriousness, “but we’ll take it up some time when we’re alone together.”

Ted nodded in his engaging grave way. “I see. Maybe we can talk about it
tomorrow on the way to school.”

“That’ll be fine.”

“Brian!”

“Mother,” Junior remarked, “that’s the third time you’ve said ‘Brian’
like that.”

“But not the last, Junior, never you fear,” his father told him.

After the boys had gone up to their own floor, Irene said suavely: “I do
wish, Brian, that you wouldn’t talk about lynching before Ted and
Junior. It was really inexcusable for you to bring up a thing like that
at dinner. There’ll be time enough for them to learn about such horrible
things when they’re older.”

“You’re absolutely wrong! If, as you’re so determined, they’ve got to
live in this damned country, they’d better find out what sort of thing
they’re up against as soon as possible. The earlier they learn it, the
better prepared they’ll be.”

“I don’t agree. I want their childhood to be happy and as free from the
knowledge of such things as it possibly can be.”

“Very laudable,” was Brian’s sarcastic answer. “Very laudable indeed,
all things considered. But can it?”

“Certainly it can. If you’ll only do your part.”

“Stuff! You know as well as I do, Irene, that it can’t. What was the use
of our trying to keep them from learning the word ‘nigger’ and its
connotation? They found out, didn’t they? And how? Because somebody
called Junior a dirty nigger.”

“Just the same you’re not to talk to them about the race problem. I
won’t have it.”

They glared at each other.

“I tell you, Irene, they’ve got to know these things, and it might as
well be now as later.”

“They do not!” she insisted, forcing back the tears of anger that were
threatening to fall.

Brian growled: “I can’t understand how anybody as intelligent as you
like to think you are can show evidences of such stupidity.” He looked
at her in a puzzled harassed way.

“Stupid!” she cried. “Is it stupid to want my children to be happy?” Her
lips were quivering.

“At the expense of proper preparation for life and their future
happiness, yes. And I’d feel I hadn’t done my duty by them if I didn’t
give them some inkling of what’s before them. It’s the least I can do. I
wanted to get them out of this hellish place years ago. You wouldn’t let
me. I gave up the idea, because you objected. Don’t expect me to give up
everything.”

Under the lash of his words she was silent. Before any answer came to
her, he had turned and gone from the room.

Sitting there alone in the forsaken dining-room, unconsciously pressing
the hands lying in her lap, tightly together, she was seized by a
convulsion of shivering. For, to her, there had been something ominous
in the scene that she had just had with her husband. Over and over in
her mind his last words: “Don’t expect me to give up everything,”
repeated themselves. What had they meant? What could they mean? Clare
Kendry?

Surely, she was going mad with fear and suspicion. She must not work
herself up. She must not! Where were all the self-control, the common
sense, that she was so proud of? Now, if ever, was the time for it.

Clare would soon be there. She must hurry or she would be late again,
and those two would wait for her downstairs together, as they had done
so often since that first time, which now seemed so long ago. Had it
been really only last October? Why, she felt years, not months, older.

Drearily she rose from her chair and went upstairs to set about the
business of dressing to go out when she would far rather have remained
at home. During the process she wondered, for the hundredth time, why
she hadn’t told Brian about herself and Felise running into Bellew the
day before, and for the hundredth time she turned away from
acknowledging to herself the real reason for keeping back the
information.

When Clare arrived, radiant in a shining red gown, Irene had not
finished dressing. But her smile scarcely hesitated as she greeted her,
saying: “I always seem to keep C. P. time, don’t I? We hardly expected
you to be able to come. Felise will be pleased. How nice you look.”

Clare kissed a bare shoulder, seeming not to notice a slight shrinking.

“I hadn’t an idea in the world, myself, that I’d be able to make it; but
Jack had to run down to Philadelphia unexpectedly. So here I am.”

Irene looked up, a flood of speech on her lips. “Philadelphia. That’s
not very far, is it? Clare, I——?”

She stopped, one of her hands clutching the side of her stool, the other
lying clenched on the dressing-table. Why didn’t she go on and tell
Clare about meeting Bellew? Why couldn’t she?

But Clare didn’t notice the unfinished sentence. She laughed and said
lightly: “It’s far enough for me. Anywhere, away from me, is far enough.
I’m not particular.”

Irene passed a hand over her eyes to shut out the accusing face in the
glass before her. With one corner of her mind she wondered how long she
had looked like that, drawn and haggard and—yes, frightened. Or was it
only imagination?

“Clare,” she asked, “have you ever seriously thought what it would mean
if he should find you out?”

“Yes.”

“Oh! You have! And what you’d do in that case?”

“Yes.” And having said it, Clare Kendry smiled quickly, a smile that
came and went like a flash, leaving untouched the gravity of her face.

That smile and the quiet resolution of that one word, “yes,” filled
Irene with a primitive paralysing dread. Her hands were numb, her feet
like ice, her heart like a stone weight. Even her tongue was like a
heavy dying thing. There were long spaces between the words as she
asked: “And what should you do?”

Clare, who was sunk in a deep chair, her eyes far away, seemed wrapped
in some pleasant impenetrable reflection. To Irene, sitting expectantly
upright, it was an interminable time before she dragged herself back to
the present to say calmly: “I’d do what I want to do more than anything
else right now. I’d come up here to live. Harlem, I mean. Then I’d be
able to do as I please, when I please.”

Irene leaned forward, cold and tense. “And what about Margery?” Her
voice was a strained whisper.

“Margery?” Clare repeated, letting her eyes flutter over Irene’s
concerned face. “Just this, ’Rene. If it wasn’t for her, I’d do it
anyway. She’s all that holds me back. But if Jack finds out, if our
marriage is broken, that lets me out. Doesn’t it?”

Her gentle resigned tone, her air of innocent candour, appeared, to her
listener, spurious. A conviction that the words were intended as a
warning took possession of Irene. She remembered that Clare Kendry had
always seemed to know what other people were thinking. Her compressed
lips grew firm and obdurate. Well, she wouldn’t know this time.

She said: “Do go downstairs and talk to Brian. He’s got a mad on.”

Though she had determined that Clare should not get at her thoughts and
fears, the words had sprung, unthought of, to her lips. It was as if
they had come from some outer layer of callousness that had no relation
to her tortured heart. And they had been, she realized, precisely the
right words for her purpose.

For as Clare got up and went out, she saw that that arrangement was as
good as her first plan of keeping her waiting up there while she
dressed—or better. She would only have hindered and rasped her. And what
matter if those two spent one hour, more or less, alone together, one or
many, now that everything had happened between them?

Ah! The first time that she had allowed herself to admit to herself that
everything had happened, had not forced herself to believe, to hope,
that nothing irrevocable had been consummated! Well, it had happened.
She knew it, and knew that she knew it.

She was surprised that, having thought the thought, conceded the fact,
she was no more hurt, cared no more, than during her previous frenzied
endeavours to escape it. And this absence of acute, unbearable pain
seemed to her unjust, as if she had been denied some exquisite solace of
suffering which the full acknowledgment should have given her.

Was it, perhaps, that she had endured all that a woman could endure of
tormenting humiliation and fear? Or was it that she lacked the capacity
for the acme of suffering? “No, no!” she denied fiercely. “I’m human
like everybody else. It’s just that I’m so tired, so worn out, I can’t
feel any more.” But she did not really believe that.

Security. Was it just a word? If not, then was it only by the sacrifice
of other things, happiness, love, or some wild ecstasy that she had
never known, that it could be obtained? And did too much striving, too
much faith in safety and permanence, unfit one for these other things?

Irene didn’t know, couldn’t decide, though for a long time she sat
questioning and trying to understand. Yet all the while, in spite of her
searchings and feeling of frustration, she was aware that, to her,
security was the most important and desired thing in life. Not for any
of the others, or for all of them, would she exchange it. She wanted
only to be tranquil. Only, unmolested, to be allowed to direct for their
own best good the lives of her sons and her husband.

Now that she had relieved herself of what was almost like a guilty
knowledge, admitted that which by some sixth sense she had long known,
she could again reach out for plans. Could think again of ways to keep
Brian by her side, and in New York. For she would not go to Brazil. She
belonged in this land of rising towers. She was an American. She grew
from this soil, and she would not be uprooted. Not even because of Clare
Kendry, or a hundred Clare Kendrys.

Brian, too, belonged here. His duty was to her and to his boys.

Strange, that she couldn’t now be sure that she had ever truly known
love. Not even for Brian. He was her husband and the father of her sons.
But was he anything more? Had she ever wanted or tried for more? In that
hour she thought not.

Nevertheless, she meant to keep him. Her freshly painted lips narrowed
to a thin straight line. True, she had left off trying to believe that
he and Clare loved and yet did not love, but she still intended to hold
fast to the outer shell of her marriage, to keep her life fixed,
certain. Brought to the edge of distasteful reality, her fastidious
nature did not recoil. Better, far better, to share him than to lose him
completely. Oh, she could close her eyes, if need be. She could bear it.
She could bear anything. And there was March ahead. March and the
departure of Clare.

Horribly clear, she could now see the reason for her instinct to
withhold—omit, rather—her news of the encounter with Bellew. If Clare
was freed, anything might happen.

She paused in her dressing, seeing with perfect clearness that dark
truth which she had from that first October afternoon felt about Clare
Kendry and of which Clare herself had once warned her—that she got the
things she wanted because she met the great condition of conquest,
sacrifice. If she wanted Brian, Clare wouldn’t revolt from the lack of
money or place. It was as she had said, only Margery kept her from
throwing all that away. And if things were taken out of her hands—Even
if she was only alarmed, only suspected that such a thing was about to
occur, anything might happen. Anything.

No! At all costs, Clare was not to know of that meeting with Bellew. Nor
was Brian. It would only weaken her own power to keep him.

They would never know from her that he was on his way to suspecting the
truth about his wife. And she would do anything, risk anything, to
prevent him from finding out that truth. How fortunate that she had
obeyed her instinct and omitted to recognize Bellew!

“Ever go up to the sixth floor, Clare?” Brian asked as he stopped the
car and got out to open the door for them.

“Why, of course! We’re on the seventeenth.”

“I mean, did you ever go up by nigger-power?”

“That’s good!” Clare laughed. “Ask ’Rene. My father was a janitor, you
know, in the good old days before every ramshackle flat had its
elevator. But you can’t mean we’ve got to walk up? Not here!”

“Yes, here. And Felise lives at the very top,” Irene told her.

“What on earth for?”

“I believe she claims it discourages the casual visitor.”

“And she’s probably right. Hard on herself, though.”

Brian said: “Yes, a bit. But she says she’d rather be dead than bored.”

“Oh, a garden! And how lovely with that undisturbed snow!”

“Yes, isn’t it? But keep to the walk with those foolish thin shoes. You
too, Irene.”

Irene walked beside them on the cleared cement path that split the
whiteness of the courtyard garden. She felt a something in the air,
something that had been between those two and would be again. It was
like a live thing pressing against her. In a quick furtive glance she
saw Clare clinging to Brian’s other arm. She was looking at him with
that provocative upward glance of hers, and his eyes were fastened on
her face with what seemed to Irene an expression of wistful eagerness.

“It’s this entrance, I believe,” she informed them in quite her ordinary
voice.

“Mind,” Brian told Clare, “you don’t fall by the wayside before the
fourth floor. They absolutely refuse to carry anyone up more than the
last two flights.”

“Don’t be silly!” Irene snapped.

The party began gaily.

Dave Freeland was at his best, brilliant, crystal clear, and sparkling.
Felise, too, was amusing, and not so sarcastic as usual, because she
liked the dozen or so guests that dotted the long, untidy living-room.
Brian was witty, though, Irene noted, his remarks were somewhat more
barbed than was customary even with him. And there was Ralph Hazelton,
throwing nonsensical shining things into the pool of talk, which the
others, even Clare, picked up and flung back with fresh adornment.

Only Irene wasn’t merry. She sat almost silent, smiling now and then,
that she might appear amused.

“What’s the matter, Irene?” someone asked. “Taken a vow never to laugh,
or something? You’re as sober as a judge.”

“No. It’s simply that the rest of you are so clever that I’m speechless,
absolutely stunned.”

“No wonder,” Dave Freeland remarked, “that you’re on the verge of tears.
You haven’t a drink. What’ll you take?”

“Thanks. If I must take something, make it a glass of ginger ale and
three drops of Scotch. The Scotch first, please. Then the ice, then the
ginger ale.”

“Heavens! Don’t attempt to mix that yourself, Dave darling. Have the
butler in,” Felise mocked.

“Yes, do. And the footman.” Irene laughed a little, then said: “It seems
dreadfully warm in here. Mind if I open this window?” With that she
pushed open one of the long casement-windows of which the Freelands were
so proud.

It had stopped snowing some two or three hours back. The moon was just
rising, and far behind the tall buildings a few stars were creeping out.
Irene finished her cigarette and threw it out, watching the tiny spark
drop slowly down to the white ground below.

Someone in the room had turned on the phonograph. Or was it the radio?
She didn’t know which she disliked more. And nobody was listening to its
blare. The talking, the laughter never for a minute ceased. Why must
they have more noise?

Dave came with her drink. “You ought not,” he told her, “to stand there
like that. You’ll take cold. Come along and talk to me, or listen to me
gabble.” Taking her arm, he led her across the room. They had just found
seats when the door-bell rang and Felise called over to him to go and
answer it.

In the next moment Irene heard his voice in the hall, carelessly polite:
“Your wife? Sorry. I’m afraid you’re wrong. Perhaps next——”

Then the roar of John Bellew’s voice above all the other noises of the
room: “I’m not wrong! I’ve been to the Redfields and I know she’s with
them. You’d better stand out of my way and save yourself trouble in the
end.”

“What is it, Dave?” Felise ran out to the door.

And so did Brian. Irene heard him saying: “I’m Redfield. What the
devil’s the matter with you?”

But Bellew didn’t heed him. He pushed past them all into the room and
strode towards Clare. They all looked at her as she got up from her
chair, backing a little from his approach.

“So you’re a nigger, a damned dirty nigger!” His voice was a snarl and a
moan, an expression of rage and of pain.

Everything was in confusion. The men had sprung forward. Felise had
leapt between them and Bellew. She said quickly: “Careful. You’re the
only white man here.” And the silver chill of her voice, as well as her
words, was a warning.

Clare stood at the window, as composed as if everyone were not staring
at her in curiosity and wonder, as if the whole structure of her life
were not lying in fragments before her. She seemed unaware of any danger
or uncaring. There was even a faint smile on her full, red lips, and in
her shining eyes.

It was that smile that maddened Irene. She ran across the room, her
terror tinged with ferocity, and laid a hand on Clare’s bare arm. One
thought possessed her. She couldn’t have Clare Kendry cast aside by
Bellew. She couldn’t have her free.

Before them stood John Bellew, speechless now in his hurt and anger.
Beyond them the little huddle of other people, and Brian stepping out
from among them.

What happened next, Irene Redfield never afterwards allowed herself to
remember. Never clearly.

One moment Clare had been there, a vital glowing thing, like a flame of
red and gold. The next she was gone.

There was a gasp of horror, and above it a sound not quite human, like a
beast in agony. “Nig! My God! Nig!”

A frenzied rush of feet down long flights of stairs. The slamming of
distant doors. Voices.

Irene stayed behind. She sat down and remained quite still, staring at a
ridiculous Japanese print on the wall across the room.

Gone! The soft white face, the bright hair, the disturbing scarlet
mouth, the dreaming eyes, the caressing smile, the whole torturing
loveliness that had been Clare Kendry. That beauty that had torn at
Irene’s placid life. Gone! The mocking daring, the gallantry of her
pose, the ringing bells of her laughter.

Irene wasn’t sorry. She was amazed, incredulous almost.

What would the others think? That Clare had fallen? That she had
deliberately leaned backward? Certainly one or the other. Not——

But she mustn’t, she warned herself, think of that. She was too tired,
and too shocked. And, indeed, both were true. She was utterly weary, and
she was violently staggered. But her thoughts reeled on. If only she
could be as free of mental as she was of bodily vigour; could only put
from her memory the vision of her hand on Clare’s arm!

“It was an accident, a terrible accident,” she muttered fiercely. “It
was.”

People were coming up the stairs. Through the still open door their
steps and talk sounded nearer, nearer.

Quickly she stood up and went noiselessly into the bedroom and closed
the door softly behind her.

Her thoughts raced. Ought she to have stayed? Should she go back out
there to them? But there would be questions. She hadn’t thought of them,
of afterwards, of this. She had thought of nothing in that sudden moment
of action.

It was cold. Icy chills ran up her spine and over her bare neck and
shoulders.

In the room outside there were voices. Dave Freeland’s and others that
she did not recognize.

Should she put on her coat? Felise had rushed down without any wrap. So
had all the others. So had Brian. Brian! He mustn’t take cold. She took
up his coat and left her own. At the door she paused for a moment,
listening fearfully. She heard nothing. No voices. No footsteps. Very
slowly she opened the door. The room was empty. She went out.

In the hall below she heard dimly the sound of feet going down the
steps, of a door being opened and closed, and of voices far away.

Down, down, down, she went, Brian’s great coat clutched in her shivering
arms and trailing a little on each step behind her.

What was she to say to them when at last she had finished going down
those endless stairs? She should have rushed out when they did. What
reason could she give for her dallying behind? Even she didn’t know why
she had done that. And what else would she be asked? There had been her
hand reaching out towards Clare. What about that?

In the midst of her wonderings and questionings came a thought so
terrifying, so horrible, that she had had to grasp hold of the banister
to save herself from pitching downwards. A cold perspiration drenched
her shaking body. Her breath came short in sharp and painful gasps.

What if Clare was not dead?

She felt nauseated, as much at the idea of the glorious body mutilated
as from fear.

How she managed to make the rest of the journey without fainting she
never knew. But at last she was down. Just at the bottom she came on the
others, surrounded by a little circle of strangers. They were all
speaking in whispers, or in the awed, discreetly lowered tones adapted
to the presence of disaster. In the first instant she wanted to turn and
rush back up the way she had come. Then a calm desperation came over
her. She braced herself, physically and mentally.

“Here’s Irene now,” Dave Freeland announced, and told her that, having
only just missed her, they had concluded that she had fainted or
something like that, and were on the way to find out about her. Felise,
she saw, was holding on to his arm, all the insolent nonchalance gone
out of her, and the golden brown of her handsome face changed to a queer
mauve colour.

Irene made no indication that she had heard Freeland, but went straight
to Brian. His face looked aged and altered, and his lips were purple and
trembling. She had a great longing to comfort him, to charm away his
suffering and horror. But she was helpless, having so completely lost
control of his mind and heart.

She stammered: “Is she—is she——?”

It was Felise who answered. “Instantly, we think.”

Irene struggled against the sob of thankfulness that rose in her throat.
Choked down, it turned to a whimper, like a hurt child’s. Someone laid a
hand on her shoulder in a soothing gesture. Brian wrapped his coat about
her. She began to cry rackingly, her entire body heaving with convulsive
sobs. He made a slight perfunctory attempt to comfort her.

“There, there, Irene. You mustn’t. You’ll make yourself sick. She’s——”
His voice broke suddenly.

As from a long distance she heard Ralph Hazelton’s voice saying: “I was
looking right at her. She just tumbled over and was gone before you
could say ‘Jack Robinson.’ Fainted, I guess. Lord! It was quick.
Quickest thing I ever saw in all my life.”

“It’s impossible, I tell you! Absolutely impossible!”

It was Brian who spoke in that frenzied hoarse voice, which Irene had
never heard before. Her knees quaked under her.

Dave Freeland said: “Just a minute, Brian. Irene was there beside her.
Let’s hear what she has to say.”

She had a moment of stark craven fear. “Oh God,” she thought, prayed,
“help me.”

A strange man, official and authoritative, addressed her. “You’re sure
she fell? Her husband didn’t give her a shove or anything like that, as
Dr. Redfield seems to think?”

For the first time she was aware that Bellew was not in the little group
shivering in the small hallway. What did that mean? As she began to work
it out in her numbed mind, she was shaken with another hideous
trembling. Not that! Oh, not that!

“No, no!” she protested. “I’m quite certain that he didn’t. I was there,
too. As close as he was. She just fell, before anybody could stop her.
I——”

Her quaking knees gave way under her. She moaned and sank down, moaned
again. Through the great heaviness that submerged and drowned her she
was dimly conscious of strong arms lifting her up. Then everything was
dark.

Centuries after, she heard the strange man saying: “Death by
misadventure, I’m inclined to believe. Let’s go up and have another look
at that window.”
